The Project Gutenberg eBook of There's Pippins and Cheese to Come
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: There's Pippins and Cheese to Come

Author: Charles S. Brooks

Release date: November 1, 2003 [eBook #10023]
                Most recently updated: December 19, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Ted Garvin, Josephine Paolucci and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THERE'S PIPPINS AND CHEESE TO COME ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Josephine Paolucci and PG Distributed Proofreaders




Other Books by the Same Author:

  "Journeys to Bagdad"
  _Sixth printing_.

  "Chimney-Pot Papers"
  _Third printing_.

  "Hints to Pilgrims"




THERE'S PIPPINS

AND

CHEESE TO COME

BY

CHARLES S. BROOKS

1917


Illustrated by Theodore Diedricksen, Jr.




TO MY FATHER AND MOTHER




CONTENTS

I. There's Pippins and Cheese to Come

II. On Buying Old Books

III. Any Stick Will Do to Beat a Dog

IV. Roads of Morning

V. The Man of Grub Street Comes from His Garret

VI. Now that Spring is Here

VII. The Friendly Genii

VIII. Mr. Pepys Sits in the Pit

IX. To an Unknown Reader

X. A Plague of All Cowards

XI. The Asperities of the Early British Reviewers

XII. The Pursuit of Fire




THERE'S PIPPINS AND CHEESE TO COME




There's Pippins and Cheese To Come


In my noonday quest for food, if the day is fine, it is my habit to shun
the nearer places of refreshment. I take the air and stretch myself. Like
Eve's serpent I go upright for a bit. Yet if time presses, there may be had
next door a not unsavory stowage. A drinking bar is nearest to the street
where its polished brasses catch the eye. It holds a gilded mirror to such
red-faced nature as consorts within. Yet you pass the bar and come upon a
range of tables at the rear.

Now, if you yield to the habits of the place you order a rump of meat.
Gravy lies about it like a moat around a castle, and if there is in you the
zest for encounter, you attack it above these murky waters. "This castle
hath a pleasant seat," you cry, and charge upon it with pike advanced. But
if your appetite is one to peck and mince, the whiffs that breathe upon the
place come unwelcome to your nostrils. In no wise are they like the sweet
South upon your senses. There is even a suspicion in you--such is your
distemper--that it is too much a witch's cauldron in the kitchen, "eye of
newt, and toe of frog," and you spy and poke upon your food. Bus boys bear
off the crockery as though they were apprenticed to a juggler and were only
at the beginning of their art. Waiters bawl strange messages to the cook.
It's a tongue unguessed by learning, yet sharp and potent. Also, there
comes a riot from the kitchen, and steam issues from the door as though the
devil himself were a partner and conducted here an upper branch. Like the
man in the old comedy, your belly may still ring dinner, but the tinkle is
faint. Such being your state, you choose a daintier place to eat.

Having now set upon a longer journey--the day being fine and the sidewalks
thronged--you pass by a restaurant that is but a few doors up the street.
A fellow in a white coat flops pancakes in the window. But even though the
pancake does a double somersault and there are twenty curious noses pressed
against the glass, still you keep your course uptown.

Nor are you led off because a near-by stairway beckons you to a Chinese
restaurant up above. A golden dragon swings over the door. Its race has
fallen since its fire-breathing grandsire guarded the fruits of the
Hesperides. Are not "soys" and "chou meins" and other such treasures of the
East laid out above? And yet the dragon dozes at its post like a sleepy
dog. No flame leaps up its gullet. The swish of its tail is stilled. If it
wag at all, it's but in friendship or because a gust of wind has stirred it
from its dreams.

I have wondered why Chinese restaurants are generally on the second story.
A casual inquiry attests it. I know of one, it is true, on the ground
level, yet here I suspect a special economy. The place had formerly been a
German restaurant, with Teuton scrolls, "Ich Dien," and heraldries on its
walls. A frugal brush changed the decoration. From the heart of a Prussian
blazonry, there flares on you in Chinese yellow a recommendation to try
"Our Chicken Chop Soy." The quartering of the House of Hohenzollern wears a
baldric in praise of "Subgum Noodle Warmein," which it seems they cook to
an unusual delicacy. Even a wall painting of Rip Van Winkle bowling at
tenpins in the mountains is now set off with a pigtail. But the chairs were
Dutch and remain as such. Generally, however, Chinese restaurants are on
the second story. Probably there is a ritual from the ancient days of Ming
Ti that Chinamen when they eat shall sit as near as possible to the sacred
moon.

But hold a bit! In your haste up town to find a place to eat, you are
missing some of the finer sights upon the way. In these windows that
you pass, the merchants have set their choicest wares. If there is any
commodity of softer gloss than common, or one shinier to the eye--so
that your poverty frets you--it is displayed here. In the window of the
haberdasher, shirts--mere torsos with not a leg below or head above--yet
disport themselves in gay neckwear. Despite their dismemberment they are
tricked to the latest turn of fashion. Can vanity survive such general
amputation? Then there is hope for immortality.

But by what sad chance have these blithe fellows been disjointed? If
a gloomy mood prevails in you--as might come from a bad turn of the
market--you fancy that the evil daughter of Herodias still lives around the
corner, and that she has set out her victims to the general view. If there
comes a hurdy-gurdy on the street and you cock your ear to the tune of
it, you may still hear the dancing measure of her wicked feet. Or it is
possible that these are the kindred of Holofernes and that they have supped
guiltily in their tents with a sisterhood of Judiths.

Or we may conceive--our thoughts running now to food--that these gamesome
creatures of the haberdasher had dressed themselves for a more recent
banquet. Their black-tailed coats and glossy shirts attest a rare occasion.
It was in holiday mood, when they were fresh-combed and perked in their
best, that they were cut off from life. It would appear that Jack Ketch the
headsman got them when they were rubbed and shining for the feast. We'll
not squint upon his writ. It is enough that they were apprehended for some
rascality. When he came thumping on his dreadful summons, here they were
already set, fopped from shoes to head in the newest whim. Spoon in hand
and bib across their knees--lest they fleck their careful fronts--they
waited for the anchovy to come. And on a sudden they were cut off from
life, unfit, unseasoned for the passage. Like the elder Hamlet's brother,
they were engaged upon an act that had no relish of salvation in it. You
may remember the lamentable child somewhere in Dickens, who because of an
abrupt and distressing accident, had a sandwich in its hand but no mouth
to put it in. Or perhaps you recall the cook of the Nancy Bell and his
grievous end. The poor fellow was stewed in his own stew-pot. It was the
Elderly Naval Man, you recall--the two of them being the ship's sole
survivors on the deserted island, and both of them lean with hunger--it was
the Elderly Naval Man (the villain of the piece) who "ups with his heels,
and smothers his squeals in the scum of the boiling broth."

And yet by looking on these torsos of the haberdasher, one is not brought
to thoughts of sad mortality. Their joy is so exultant. And all the things
that they hold dear--canes, gloves, silk hats, and the newer garments on
which fashion makes its twaddle--are within reach of their armless sleeves.
Had they fingers they would be smoothing themselves before the glass. Their
unbodied heads, wherever they may be, are still smiling on the world,
despite their divorcement. Their tongues are still ready with a jest, their
lips still parted for the anchovy to come.

A few days since, as I was thinking--for so I am pleased to call my muddy
stirrings--what manner of essay I might write and how best to sort and lay
out the rummage, it happened pat to my needs that I received from a friend
a book entitled "The Closet of Sir Kenelm Digby Knight Opened." Now, before
it came I had got so far as to select a title. Indeed, I had written the
title on seven different sheets of paper, each time in the hope that by
the run of the words I might leap upon some further thought. Seven times I
failed and in the end the sheets went into the waste basket, possibly
to the confusion of Annie our cook, who may have mistaken them for a
reiterated admonishment towards the governance of her kitchen--at the
least, a hint of my desires and appetite for cheese and pippins.

"The Closet of Sir Kenelm Digby Opened" is a cook book. It is due you
to know this at once, otherwise your thoughts--if your nature be
vagrant--would drift towards family skeletons. Or maybe the domestic traits
prevail and you would think of dress-clothes hanging in camphorated bags
and a row of winter boots upon a shelf.

I am disqualified to pass upon the merits of a cook book, for the reason
that I have little discrimination in food. It is not that I am totally
indifferent to what lies on the platter. Indeed, I have more than a tribal
aversion to pork in general, while, on the other hand, I quicken joyfully
when noodles are interspersed with bacon. I have a tooth for sweets, too,
although I hold it unmanly and deny it as I can. I am told also--although
I resent it--that my eye lights up on the appearance of a tray of French
pastry. I admit gladly, however, my love of onions, whether they come
hissing from the skillet, or lie in their first tender whiteness. They
are at their best when they are placed on bread and are eaten largely at
midnight after society has done its worst.

A fine dinner is lost within me. A quail is but an inferior chicken--a poor
relation outside the exclusive hennery. Terrapin sits low in my regard,
even though it has wallowed in the most aristocratic marsh. Through such
dinners I hack and saw my way without even gaining a memory of my progress.
If asked the courses, I balk after the recital of the soup. Indeed, I am so
forgetful of food, even when I dine at home, that I can well believe that
Adam when he was questioned about the apple was in real confusion. He had
or he had not. It was mixed with the pomegranate or the quince that Eve had
sliced and cooked on the day before.

A dinner at its best is brought to a single focus. There is one dish
to dominate the cloth, a single bulk to which all other dishes are
subordinate. If there be turkey, it should mount from a central platter.
Its protruding legs out-top the candles. All other foods are, as it were,
privates in Caesar's army. They do no more than flank the pageant. Nor may
the pantry hold too many secrets. Within reason, everything should be
set out at once, or at least a gossip of its coming should run before.
Otherwise, if the stew is savory, how shall one reserve a corner for the
custard? One must partition himself justly--else, by an over-stowage at the
end, he list and sink.

I am partial to picnics--the spreading of the cloth in the woods or beside
a stream--although I am not avid for sandwiches unless hunger press me.
Rather, let there be a skillet in the company and let a fire be started!
Nor need a picnic consume the day. In summer it requires but the late
afternoon, with such borrowing of the night as is necessary for the
journey home. You leave the street car, clanking with your bundles like an
itinerant tinman. You follow a stream, which on these lower stretches, it
is sad to say, is already infected with the vices of the city. Like many a
countryman who has come to town, it has fallen to dissipation. It shows the
marks of the bottle. Further up, its course is cleaner. You cross it in the
mud. Was it not Christian who fell into the bog because of the burden on
his back? Then you climb a villainously long hill and pop out upon an open
platform above the city.

The height commands a prospect to the west. Below is the smoke of a
thousand suppers. Up from the city there comes the hum of life, now
somewhat fallen with the traffic of the day--as though Nature already
practiced the tune for sending her creatures off to sleep. You light a
fire. The baskets disgorge their secrets. Ants and other leviathans think
evidently that a circus has come or that bears are in the town. The chops
and bacon achieve their appointed destiny. You throw the last bone across
your shoulder. It slips and rattles to the river. The sun sets. Night like
an ancient dame puts on her jewels:

  And now that I have climbed and won this height,
  I must tread downward through the sloping shade
  And travel the bewildered tracks till night.
  Yet for this hour I still may here be stayed
  And see the gold air and the silver fade
  And the last bird fly into the last light.

By these confessions you will see how unfit I am to comment on the old cook
book of Sir Kenelm Digby. Yet it lies before me. It may have escaped your
memory in the din of other things, that in the time when Oliver Cromwell
still walked the earth, there lived in England a man by the name of Kenelm
Digby, who was renowned in astrology and alchemy, piracy, wit, philosophy
and fashion. It appears that wherever learning wagged its bulbous head, Sir
Kenelm was of the company. It appears, also, that wherever the mahogany did
most groan, wherever the possets were spiced most delicately to the nose,
there too did Sir Kenelm bib and tuck himself. With profundity, as
though he sucked wisdom from its lowest depth, he spouted forth on the
transmutation of the baser metals or tossed you a phrase from Paracelsus.
Or with long instructive finger he dissertated on the celestial universe.
One would have thought that he had stood by on the making of it and that
his judgment had prevailed in the larger problems. Yet he did not neglect
his trencher.

And now as time went on, the richness of the food did somewhat dominate his
person. The girth of his wisdom grew no less, but his body fattened. In
a word, the good gentleman's palate came to vie with his intellect. Less
often was he engaged upon some dark saying of Isidore of Seville. Rather,
even if his favorite topic astrology were uppermost about the table, his
eye travelled to the pantry on every change of dishes. His fingers, too,
came to curl most delicately on his fork. He used it like an epicure,
poking his viands apart for sharpest scrutiny. His nod upon a compote was
much esteemed.

Now mark his further decline! On an occasion--surely the old rascal's head
is turned!--he would be found in private talk with his hostess, the Lady of
Middlesex, or with the Countess of Monmouth, not as you might expect, on
the properties of fire or on the mortal diseases of man, but--on subjects
quite removed. Society, we may be sure, began to whisper of these snug
parleys in the arbor after dinner, these shadowed mumblings on the balcony
when the moon was up--and Lady Digby stiffened into watchfulness. It was
when they took leave that she saw the Countess slip a note into her lord's
fingers. Her jealousy broke out. "Viper!" She spat the words and seized her
husband's wrist. Of course the note was read. It proved, however, that Sir
Kenelm was innocent of all mischief. To the disappointment of the gossips,
who were tuned to a spicier anticipation, the note was no more than a
recipe of the manner that the Countess was used to mix her syllabub, with
instruction that it was the "rosemary a little bruised and the limon-peal
that did quicken the taste." Advice, also, followed in the postscript on
the making of tea, with counsel that "the boiling water should remain upon
it just so long as one might say a _miserere_." A mutual innocence being
now established, the Lady Digby did by way of apology peck the Countess on
the cheek.

Sir Kenelm died in 1665, full of years. In that day his fame rested chiefly
on his books in physic and chirurgery. His most enduring work was still to
be published--"The Closet Opened."

It was two years after his death that his son came upon a bundle of his
father's papers that had hitherto been overlooked. I fancy that he went
spying in the attic on a rainy day. In the darkest corner, behind the
rocking horse--if such devices were known in those distant days--he came
upon a trunk of his father's papers. "Od's fish," said Sir Kenelm's son,
"here's a box of manuscripts. It is like that they pertain to alchemy or
chirurgery." He pulled out a bundle and held it to the light--such light as
came through the cobwebs of the ancient windows. "Here be strange matters,"
he exclaimed. Then he read aloud: "My Lord of Bristol's Scotch collops are
thus made: Take a leg of fine sweet mutton, that to make it tender, is
kept as long as possible may be without stinking. In winter seven or eight
days"--"Ho! Ho!" cried Sir Kenelm's son. "This is not alchemy!" He drew out
another parchment and read again: "My Lord of Carlile's sack posset, how
it's made: Take a pottle of cream and boil in it a little whole cinnamon
and three or four flakes of mace. Boil it until it simpreth and bubbleth."

By this time, as you may well imagine, Sir Kenelm's son was wrought to an
excitement. It is likely that he inherited his father's palate and that the
juices of his appetite were stirred. Seizing an armful of the papers, he
leaped down the attic steps, three at a time. His lady mother thrust a
curled and papered head from her door and asked whether the chimney were
afire, but he did not heed her. The cook was waddling in her pattens. He
cried to her to throw wood upon the fire.

That night the Digby household was served a delicacy, red herrings broiled
in the fashion of my Lord d'Aubigny, "short and crisp and laid upon a
sallet." Also, there was a wheaten flommery as it was made in the West
Country--for the cook chose quite at random--and a slip-coat cheese as
Master Phillips proportioned it. Also, against the colic, which was
ravishing the country, the cook prepared a metheglin as Lady Stuart mixed
it--"nettles, fennel and grumel seeds, of each two ounces being small-cut
and mixed with honey and boiled together." It is on record that the Lady
Digby smiled for the first time since her lord had died, and when the
grinning cook bore in the platter, she beat upon the table with her spoon.

The following morning, Sir Kenelm's son posted to London bearing the
recipes, with a pistol in the pocket of his great coat against the crossing
of Hounslow Heath. He went to a printer at the Star in Little Britain whose
name was H. Brome.

Shortly the book appeared. It was the son who wrote the preface: "There
needs no Rhetoricating Floscules to set it off. The Authour, as is well
known, having been a Person of Eminency for his Learning, and of Exquisite
Curiosity in his Researches. Even that Incomparable Sir Kenelme Digbie
Knight, Fellow of the Royal Society and Chancellour to the Queen Mother,
(Et omen in Nomine) His name does sufficiently Auspicate the Work." The
sale of the book is not recorded. It is supposed that the Lady Middlesex,
so many of whose recipes had been used, directed that her chair be carried
to the shop where the book was for sale and that she bought largely of it.
The Countess of Dorset bought a copy and spelled it out word for word to
her cook. As for the Lady Monmouth, she bought not a single copy, which
neglect on coming to the Digbys aroused a coolness.

To this day it is likely that a last auspicated volume still sits on its
shelf with the spice jars in some English country kitchen and that a worn
and toothless cook still thumbs its leaves. If the guests about the table
be of an antique mind, still will they pledge one another with its honeyed
drinks, still will they pipe and whistle of its virtues, still will they--

"EAT"--A flaring sign hangs above the sidewalk. By this time, in our
noonday search for food, we have come into the thick of the restaurants. In
the jungle of the city, here is the feeding place. Here come the growling
bipeds for such bones and messes as are thrown them.

The waiter thrusts a card beneath my nose. "Nice leg of lamb, sir?" I waved
him off. "Hold a bit!" I cried. "You'll fetch me a capon in white broth as
my Lady Monmouth broileth hers. Put plentiful sack in it and boil it until
it simpreth!" The waiter scratched his head. "The chicken pie is good," he
said. "It's our Wednesday dish." "Varlet!" I cried--then softened. "Let it
be the chicken pie! But if the cook knoweth the manner that Lord Carlile
does mix and pepper it, let that manner be followed to the smallest
fraction of a pinch!"





On Buying Old Books


By some slim chance, reader, you may be the kind of person who, on a visit
to a strange city, makes for a bookshop. Of course your slight temporal
business may detain you in the earlier hours of the day. You sit with
committees and stroke your profound chin, or you spend your talent in the
market, or run to and fro and wag your tongue in persuasion. Or, if you be
on a holiday, you strain yourself on the sights of the city, against being
caught in an omission. The bolder features of a cathedral must be grasped
to satisfy a quizzing neighbor lest he shame you later on your hearth, a
building must be stuffed inside your memory, or your pilgrim feet must wear
the pavement of an ancient shrine. However, these duties being done and the
afternoon having not yet declined, do you not seek a bookshop to regale
yourself?

Doubtless, we have met. As you have scrunched against the shelf not to
block the passage, but with your head thrown back to see the titles up
above, you have noticed at the corner of your eye--unless it was one of
your blinder moments when you were fixed wholly on the shelf--a man in
a slightly faded overcoat of mixed black and white, a man just past the
nimbleness of youth, whose head is plucked of its full commodity of hair.
It was myself. I admit the portrait, though modesty has curbed me short of
justice.

Doubtless, we have met. It was your umbrella--which you held villainously
beneath your arm--that took me in the ribs when you lighted on a set of
Fuller's Worthies. You recall my sour looks, but it was because I had
myself lingered on the volumes but cooled at the price. How you smoothed
and fingered them! With what triumph you bore them off! I bid you--for I
see you in a slippered state, eased and unbuttoned after dinner--I bid you
turn the pages with a slow thumb, not to miss the slightest tang of their
humor. You will of course go first, because of its broad fame, to the page
on Shakespeare and Ben Jonson and their wet-combats at the Mermaid. But
before the night is too far gone and while yet you can hold yourself from
nodding, you will please read about Captain John Smith of Virginia and his
"strange performances, the scene whereof is laid at such a distance, they
are cheaper credited than confuted."

In no proper sense am I a buyer of old books. I admit a bookish quirk
maybe, a love of the shelf, a weakness for morocco, especially if it is
stained with age. I will, indeed, shirk a wedding for a bookshop. I'll
go in "just to look about a bit, to see what the fellow has," and on an
occasion I pick up a volume. But I am innocent of first editions. It is
a stiff courtesy, as becomes a democrat, that I bestow on this form
of primogeniture. Of course, I have nosed my way with pleasure along
aristocratic shelves and flipped out volumes here and there to ask their
price, but for the greater part, it is the plainer shops that engage me. If
a rack of books is offered cheap before the door, with a fixed price upon a
card, I come at a trot. And if a brown dust lies on them, I bow and sniff
upon the rack, as though the past like an ancient fop in peruke and buckle
were giving me the courtesy of its snuff box. If I take the dust in my
nostrils and chance to sneeze, it is the fit and intended observance toward
the manners of a former century.

I have in mind such a bookshop in Bath, England. It presents to the street
no more than a decent front, but opens up behind like a swollen bottle.
There are twenty rooms at least, piled together with such confusion of
black passages and winding steps, that one might think that the owner
himself must hold a thread when he visits the remoter rooms. Indeed, such
are the obscurities and dim turnings of the place, that, were the legend of
the Minotaur but English, you might fancy that the creature still lived in
this labyrinth, to nip you between his toothless gums--for the beast grows
old--at some darker corner. There is a story of the place, that once a raw
clerk having been sent to rummage in the basement, his candle tipped off
the shelf. He was left in so complete darkness that his fears overcame his
judgment and for two hours he roamed and babbled among the barrels. Nor was
his absence discovered until the end of the day when, as was the custom,
the clerks counted noses at the door. When they found him, he bolted up the
steps, nor did he cease his whimper until he had reached the comforting
twilight of the outer world. He served thereafter in the shop a full two
years and had a beard coming--so the story runs--before he would again
venture beyond the third turning of the passage; to the stunting of his
scholarship, for the deeper books lay in the farther windings.

Or it may appear credible that in ages past a jealous builder contrived the
place. Having no learning himself and being at odds with those of better
opportunity, he twisted the pattern of the house. Such was his evil temper,
that he set the steps at a dangerous hazard in the dark, in order that
scholars--whose eyes are bleared at best--might risk their legs to the end
of time. Those of strict orthodoxy have even suspected the builder to have
been an atheist, for they have observed what double joints and steps and
turnings confuse the passage to the devouter books--the Early Fathers in
particular being up a winding stair where even the soberest reader might
break his neck. Be these things as they may, leather bindings in sets of
"grenadier uniformity" ornament the upper and lighter rooms. Biography
straggles down a hallway, with a candle needed at the farther end. A room
of dingy plays--Wycherley, Congreve and their crew--looks out through an
area grating. It was through even so foul an eye, that when alive, they
looked upon the world. As for theology, except for the before-mentioned
Fathers, it sits in general and dusty convention on the landing to the
basement, its snuffy sermons, by a sad misplacement--or is there an
ironical intention?--pointing the way to the eternal abyss below.

It was in this shop that I inquired whether there was published a book on
piracy in Cornwall. Now, I had lately come from Tintagel on the Cornish
coast, and as I had climbed upon the rocks and looked down upon the sea, I
had wondered to myself whether, if the knowledge were put out before me, I
could compose a story of Spanish treasure and pirates. For I am a prey to
such giddy ambition. A foul street--if the buildings slant and topple--will
set me thinking delightfully of murders. A wharf-end with water lapping
underneath and bits of rope about will set me itching for a deep-sea plot.
Or if I go on broader range and see in my fancy a broken castle on a hill,
I'll clear its moat and sound trumpets on its walls. If there is pepper
in my mood, I'll storm its dungeon. Or in a softer moment I'll trim its
unsubstantial towers with pageantry and rest upon my elbow until I fall
asleep. So being cast upon the rugged Cornish coast whose cliffs are so
swept with winter winds that the villages sit for comfort in the hollows,
it was to be expected that my thoughts would run toward pirates.

There is one rock especially which I had climbed in the rain and fog of
early morning. A reckless path goes across its face with a sharp pitch to
the ocean. It was so slippery and the wind so tugged and pulled to throw me
off, that although I endangered my dignity, I played the quadruped on the
narrower parts. But once on top in the open blast of the storm and safe
upon the level, I thumped with desire for a plot. In each inlet from the
ocean I saw a pirate lugger--such is the pleasing word--with a keg of rum
set up. Each cranny led to a cavern with doubloons piled inside. The
very tempest in my ears was compounded out of ships at sea and wreck and
pillage. I needed but a plot, a thread of action to string my villains on.
If this were once contrived, I would spice my text with sailors' oaths and
such boasting talk as might lie in my invention. Could I but come upon a
plot, I might yet proclaim myself an author.

With this guilty secret in me I blushed as I asked the question. It seemed
sure that the shopkeeper must guess my purpose. I felt myself suspected as
though I were a rascal buying pistols to commit a murder. Indeed, I seem
to remember having read that even hardened criminals have become confused
before a shopkeeper and betrayed themselves. Of course, Dick Turpin and
Jerry Abershaw could call for pistols in the same easy tone they ordered
ale, but it would take a practiced villainy. But I in my innocence wanted
nothing but the meager outline of a pirate's life, which I might fatten to
my uses.

But on a less occasion, when there is no plot thumping in me, I still feel
a kind of embarrassment when I ask for a book out of the general demand. I
feel so like an odd stick. This embarrassment applies not to the request
for other commodities. I will order a collar that is quite outside the
fashion, in a high-pitched voice so that the whole shop can hear. I could
bargain for a purple waistcoat--did my taste run so--and though the
sidewalk listened, it would not draw a blush. I have traded even for
women's garments--though this did strain me--without an outward twitch.
Finally, to top my valor, I have bought sheet music of the lighter kind and
have pronounced the softest titles so that all could hear. But if I desire
the poems of Lovelace or the plays of Marlowe, I sidle close up to the
shopkeeper to get his very ear. If the book is visible, I point my thumb at
it without a word.

It was but the other day--in order to fill a gap in a paper I was
writing--I desired to know the name of an author who is obscure although
his work has been translated into nearly all languages. I wanted to know a
little about the life of the man who wrote _Mary Had a Little Lamb_, which,
I am told, is known by children over pretty much all the western world. It
needed only a trip to the Public Library. Any attendant would direct me to
the proper shelf. Yet once in the building, my courage oozed. My question,
though serious, seemed too ridiculous to be asked. I would sizzle as I
met the attendant's eye. Of a consequence, I fumbled on my own devices,
possibly to the increase of my general knowledge, but without gaining what
I sought.

They had no book in the Bath shop on piracy in Cornwall. I was offered
instead a work in two volumes on the notorious highwaymen of history, and
for a moment my plot swerved in that direction. But I put it by. To pay the
fellow for his pains--for he had dug in barrels to his shoulders and had a
smudge across his nose--I bought a copy of Thomson's "Castle of Indolence,"
and in my more energetic moods I read it. And so I came away.

On leaving the shop, lest I should be nipped in a neglect, I visited the
Roman baths. Then I took the waters in the Assembly Room. It was Sam
Weller, you may recall, who remarked, when he was entertained by the select
footmen, that the waters tasted like warm flat-irons. Finally, I viewed
the Crescent around which the shirted Winkle ran with the valorous Dowler
breathing on his neck. With such distractions, as you may well imagine,
Cornish pirates became as naught. Such mental vibration as I had was now
gone toward a tale of fashion in the days when Queen Anne was still alive.
Of a consequence, I again sought the bookshop and stifling my timidity, I
demanded such volumes as might set me most agreeably to my task.

I have in mind also a bookshop of small pretension in a town in Wales. For
purely secular delight, maybe, it was too largely composed of Methodist
sermons. Hell fire burned upon its shelves with a warmth to singe so poor a
worm as I. Yet its signboard popped its welcome when I had walked ten miles
of sunny road. Possibly it was the chair rather than the divinity that
keeps the place in memory. The owner was absent on an errand, and his
daughter, who had been clumping about the kitchen on my arrival, was
uninstructed in the price marks. So I read and fanned myself until his
return.

Perhaps my sluggishness toward first editions--to which I have hinted
above--comes in part from the acquaintance with a man who in a linguistic
outburst as I met him, pronounced himself to be a numismatist and
philatelist. One only of these names would have satisfied a man of less
conceit. It is as though the pteranodon should claim also to be the
spoon-bill dinosaur. It is against modesty that one man should summon all
the letters. No, the numismatist's head is not crammed with the mysteries
of life and death, nor is a philatelist one who is possessed with the
dimmer secrets of eternity. Rather, this man who was so swelled with
titles, eked a living by selling coins and stamps, and he was on his way
to Europe to replenish his wares. Inside his waistcoat, just above his
liver--if he owned so human an appendage--he carried a magnifying glass.
With this, when the business fit was on him, he counted the lines and dots
upon a stamp, the perforations on its edge. He catalogued its volutes, its
stipples, the frisks and curlings of its pattern. He had numbered the very
hairs on the head of George Washington, for in such minutiae did the value
of the stamp reside. Did a single hair spring up above the count, it would
invalidate the issue. Such values, got by circumstance or accident--resting
on a flaw--founded on a speck--cause no ferment of my desires.

For the buying of books, it is the cheaper shops where I most often prowl.
There is in London a district around Charing Cross Road where almost every
shop has books for sale. There is a continuous rack along the sidewalk,
each title beckoning for your attention. You recall the class of
street-readers of whom Charles Lamb wrote--"poor gentry, who, not having
wherewithal to buy or hire a book, filch a little learning at the open
stalls." It was on some such street that these folk practiced their
innocent larceny. If one shopkeeper frowned at the diligence with which
they read "Clarissa," they would continue her distressing adventures across
the way. By a lingering progress up the street, "Sir Charles Grandison"
might be nibbled down--by such as had the stomach--without the outlay of
a single penny. As for Gibbon and the bulbous historians, though a whole
perusal would outlast the summer and stretch to the colder months, yet with
patience they could be got through. However, before the end was come even a
hasty reader whose eye was nimble on the page would be blowing on his nails
and pulling his tails between him and the November wind.

But the habit of reading at the open stalls was not only with the poor. You
will remember that Mr. Brownlow was addicted. Really, had not the Artful
Dodger stolen his pocket handkerchief as he was thus engaged upon his book,
the whole history of Oliver Twist must have been quite different. And Pepys
himself, Samuel Pepys, F.R.S., was guilty. "To Paul's Church Yard," he
writes, "and there looked upon the second part of Hudibras, which I buy
not, but borrow to read." Such parsimony is the curse of authors. To thumb
a volume cheaply around a neighborhood is what keeps them in their garrets.
It is a less offence to steal peanuts from a stand. Also, it is recorded in
the life of Beau Nash that the persons of fashion of his time, to pass a
tedious morning "did divert themselves with reading in the booksellers'
shops." We may conceive Mr. Fanciful Fopling in the sleepy blink of those
early hours before the pleasures of the day have made a start, inquiring
between his yawns what latest novels have come down from London, or whether
a new part of "Pamela" is offered yet. If the post be in, he will prop
himself against the shelf and--unless he glaze and nod--he will read
cheaply for an hour. Or my Lady Betty, having taken the waters in the
pump-room and lent her ear to such gossip as is abroad so early, is now
handed to her chair and goes round by Gregory's to read a bit. She is
flounced to the width of the passage. Indeed, until the fashion shall
abate, those more solid authors that are set up in the rear of the shop,
must remain during her visits in general neglect. Though she hold herself
against the shelf and tilt her hoops, it would not be possible to pass. She
is absorbed in a book of the softer sort, and she flips its pages against
her lap-dog's nose.

But now behold the student coming up the street! He is clad in shining
black. He is thin of shank as becomes a scholar. He sags with knowledge. He
hungers after wisdom. He comes opposite the bookshop. It is but coquetry
that his eyes seek the window of the tobacconist. His heart, you may be
sure, looks through the buttons at his back. At last he turns. He pauses on
the curb. Now desire has clutched him. He jiggles his trousered shillings.
He treads the gutter. He squints upon the rack. He lights upon a treasure.
He plucks it forth. He is unresolved whether to buy it or to spend the
extra shilling on his dinner. Now all you cooks together, to save your
business, rattle your pans to rouse him! If within these ancient buildings
there are onions ready peeled--quick!--throw them in the skillet that the
whiff may come beneath his nose! Chance trembles and casts its vote--eenie
meenie--down goes the shilling--he has bought the book. Tonight he will
spread it beneath his candle. Feet may beat a snare of pleasure on the
pavement, glad cries may pipe across the darkness, a fiddle may scratch its
invitation--all the rumbling notes of midnight traffic will tap in vain
their summons upon his window.




Any Stick Will Do To Beat A Dog


Reader, possibly on one of your country walks you have come upon a man with
his back against a hedge, tormented by a fiend in the likeness of a dog.
You yourself, of course, are not a coward. You possess that cornerstone of
virtue, a love for animals. If at your heels a dog sniffs and growls, you
humor his mistake, you flick him off and proceed with unbroken serenity. It
is scarcely an interlude to your speculation on the market. Or if you work
upon a sonnet and are in the vein, your thoughts, despite the beast, run
unbroken to a rhyme. But pity this other whose heart is less stoutly
wrapped! He has gone forth on a holiday to take the country air, to thrust
himself into the freer wind, to poke with his stick for such signs of
Spring as may be hiding in the winter's leaves. Having been grinding in an
office he flings himself on the great round world. He has come out to smell
the earth. Or maybe he seeks a hilltop for a view of the fields that lie
below patched in many colors, as though nature had been sewing at her
garments and had mended the cloth from her bag of scraps.

On such a journey this fellow is travelling when, at a turn of the road, he
hears the sound of barking. As yet there is no dog in sight. He pauses. He
listens. How shall one know whether the sound comes up a wrathful gullet or
whether the dog bays at him impersonally, as at the distant moon? Or maybe
he vents himself upon a stubborn cow. Surely it is not an idle tune he
practices. He holds a victim in his mind. There is sour venom on his
churlish tooth. Is it best to go roundabout, or forward with such a nice
compound of innocence, boldness and modesty as shall satisfy the beast? If
one engross oneself on something that lies to the lee of danger, it allays
suspicion. Or if one absorb oneself upon the flora--a primrose on the
river's brim--it shows him clear and stainless. The stupidest dog should
see that so close a student can have no evil in him. Perhaps it would be
better to throw away one's stick lest it make a show of violence. Or it may
be concealed along the outer leg. Ministers of Grace defend us, what an
excitement in the barnyard! Has virtue no reward? Shall innocence perish
off the earth? Not one dog, but many, come running out. There has gone
a rumor about the barn that there is a stranger to be eaten, and it's
likely--if they keep their clamor--there will be a bone for each. Note how
the valor oozes from the man of peace! Observe his sidling gait, his skirts
pulled close, his hollowed back, his head bent across his shoulder, his
startled eye! Watch him mince his steps, lest a lingering heel be nipped!
Listen to him try the foremost dog with names, to gull him to a belief that
they have met before in happier circumstances! He appeals mutely to the
farmhouse that a recall be sounded. The windows are tightly curtained. The
heavens are comfortless.

You remember the fellow in the play who would have loved war had they not
digged villainous saltpetre from the harmless earth. The countryside, too,
in my opinion, would be more peaceful of a summer afternoon were it not
overrun with dogs. Let me be plain! I myself like dogs--sleepy dogs
blinking in the firelight, friendly dogs with wagging tails, young dogs in
their first puppyhood with their teeth scarce sprouted, whose jaws have not
yet burgeoned into danger, and old dogs, too, who sun themselves and give
forth hollow, toothless, reassuring sounds. When a dog assumes the cozy
habits of the cat without laying off his nobler nature, he is my friend. A
dog of vegetarian aspect pleases me. Let him bear a mild eye as though he
were nourished on the softer foods! I would wish every dog to have a full
complement of tail. It's the sure barometer of his warm regard. There's no
art to find his mind's construction in the face. And I would have him with
not too much curiosity. It's a quality that brings him too often to the
gate. It makes him prone to sniff when one sits upon a visit. Nor do I like
dogs addicted to sudden excitement. Lethargy becomes them better. Let them
be without the Gallic graces! In general, I like a dog to whom I have been
properly introduced, with an exchange of credentials. While the dog is by,
let his master take my hand and address me in softest tones, to cement the
understanding! At bench-shows I love the beasts, although I keep to the
middle of the aisle. The streets are all the safer when so many of the
creatures are kept within.

Frankly, I would enjoy the country more, if I knew that all the dogs were
away on visits. Of course, the highroad is quite safe. Its frequent traffic
is its insurance. Then, too, the barns are at such a distance, it is only a
monstrous anger can bring the dog. But if you are in need of direction you
select a friendly white house with green shutters. You swing open the gate
and crunch across the pebbles to the door. To the nearer eye there is a
look of "dog" about the place. Or maybe you are hot and thirsty, and there
is a well at the side of the house. Is it better to gird yourself to danger
or to put off your thirst until the crossroads where pop is sold?

Or a lane leads down to the river. Even at this distance you hear the
shallow brawl of water on the stones. A path goes off across a hill, with
trees beckoning at the top. There is a wind above and a wider sweep of
clouds. Surely, from the crest of the hill the whole county will lie before
you. Such tunes as come up from the world below--a school-bell, a rooster
crowing, children laughing on the road, a threshing machine on the lower
meadows--such tunes are pitched to a marvellous softness. Shall we follow
the hot pavement, or shall we dare those lonely stretches?

There is a kind of person who is steeped too much in valor. He will cross a
field although there is a dog inside the fence. Goodness knows that I would
rather keep to the highroad with such humility as shall not rouse the
creature. Or he will shout and whistle tunes that stir the dogs for miles.
He slashes his stick against the weeds as though in challenge. One might
think that he went about on unfeeling stalks instead of legs as children
walk on stilts, or that a former accident had clipped him off above the
knees and that he was now jointed out of wood to a point beyond the biting
limit. Or perhaps the clothes he wears beneath--the inner mesh and very
balbriggan of his attire--is of so hard a texture that it turns a tooth. Be
these defenses as they may, note with what bravado he mounts the wall! One
leg dangles as though it were baited and were angling for a bite.

There is a French village near Quebec whose population is chiefly dogs.
It lies along the river in a single street, not many miles from the point
where Wolfe climbed to the Plains of Abraham. There are a hundred houses
flat against the roadway and on the steps of each there sits a dog. As I
went through on foot, each of these dogs picked me up, examined me nasally
and passed me on, not generously as though I had stood the test, but rather
in deep suspicion that I was a queer fellow, not to be penetrated at first,
but one who would surely be found out and gobbled before coming to the
end of the street. As long as I would eventually furnish forth the common
banquet, it mattered not which dog took the first nip. Inasmuch as I would
at last be garnished for the general tooth, it would be better to wait
until all were gathered around the platter. "Good neighbor dog," each
seemed to say, "you too sniff upon the rogue! If he be honest, my old nose
is much at fault." Meantime I padded lightly through the village, at first
calling on the dogs by English names, but later using such wisps as I had
of French. "Aucassin, mon pauvre chien. Voici, Tintagiles, alors donc mon
cherie. Je suis votre ami," but with little effect.

But the dogs that one meets in the Canadian woods are of the fiercest
breed. They border on the wolf. They are called huskies and they are so
strong and so fleet of foot that they pull sleds for hours across the
frozen lakes at almost the speed of a running horse. It must be confessed
that they are handsome and if it happens to be your potato peelings and
discarded fish that they eat, they warm into friendliness. Indeed, on these
occasions, one can make quite a show of bravery by stroking and dealing
lightly with them. But once upon a time in an ignorant moment two other
campers and myself followed a lonely railroad track and struck off on a
path through the pines in search of a certain trapper on a fur farm. The
path went on a broken zigzag avoiding fallen trees and soft hollows,
conducting itself on the whole with more patience than firmness. We walked
a quarter of a mile, but still we saw no cabin. The line of the railroad
had long since disappeared. An eagle wheeled above us and quarrelled at our
intrusion. Presently to test our course and learn whether we were coming
near the cabin, we gave a shout. Immediately out of the deeper woods there
came a clamor that froze us. Such sounds, it seemed, could issue only from
bloody and dripping jaws. In a panic, as by a common impulse we turned and
ran. Yet we did not run frankly as when the circus lion is loose, but in a
shamefaced manner--an attempt at a retreat in good order--something between
a walk and a run. At the end of a hundred yards we stopped. No dogs had
fallen on us. Danger had not burst its kennel. We hallooed again, to rouse
the trapper. At last, after a minute of suspense, came his answering voice,
the sweetest sound to be imagined. Whereupon I came down from my high stump
which I had climbed for a longer view.

I am convinced that I am not alone in my--shall I say diffidence?--toward
dogs. Indeed, there is evidence from the oldest times that mankind, in its
more honest moments, has confessed to a fear of dogs. In recognition of
this general fear, the unmuzzled Cerberus was put at the gate of Hades.
It was rightly felt that when the unhappy pilgrims got within, his fifty
snapping heads were better than a bolt upon the door. It was better for
them to endure the ills they had, than be nipped in the upper passage. He,
also, who first spoke the ancient proverb, _Let sleeping dogs lie_, did no
more than voice the caution of the street. And he, also, who invented the
saying that the world is going to the bow-wows, lodged his deplorable
pessimism in fitting words.

It was Daniel who sat with the lions. But there are degrees of bravery. On
Long Street, within sight of my window--just where the street gets into its
most tangled traffic--there has hung for many years the painted signboard
of a veterinary surgeon. Its artist was in the first flourish of youth. Old
age had not yet chilled him when he mixed his gaudy colors. The surgeon's
name is set up in modest letters, but the horse below flames with color.
What a flaring nostril! What an eager eye! How arched the neck! Here is a
wrath and speed unknown to the quadrupeds of this present Long Street. Such
mild-eyed, accumbent, sharp-ribbed horses as now infest the curb--mere
whittlings from a larger age--hang their heads at their degeneracy. Indeed,
these horses seem to their owners not to be worth the price of a nostrum.
If disease settles in them, let them lean against a post until the fit is
past! And of a consequence, the doctor's work has fallen off. It has
become a rare occasion when it is permitted him to stroke his chin in
contemplation of some inner palsy. Therefore to give his wisdom scope,
the doctor some time since announced the cellar of the building to be a
hospital for dogs. Must I press the analogy? I have seen the doctor with
bowl and spoon in hand take leave of the cheerful world. He opens the
cellar door. A curdling yelp comes up the stairs. In the abyss below there
are twenty dogs at least, all of them sick, all dangerous. Not since Orion
led his hunting pack across the heavens has there been so fierce a sound.
The door closes. There is a final yelp, such as greets a bone. Doubtless,
by this time, they are munching on the doctor. Good sir, had you lived in
pre-apostolic days, your name would have been lined with Daniel's in the
hymn. I might have spent my earliest treble in your praise.

But there are other kinds of dogs. Gentlest of readers, have you ever
passed a few days at Tunbridge Wells? It lies on one of the roads that run
from London to the Channel and for several hundred years persons have gone
there to take the waters against the more fashionable ailments. Its chief
fame was in the days when rich folk, to ward off for the season a touch of
ancestral gout, travelled down from London in their coaches. We may fancy
Lord Thingumdo crossing his sleek legs inside or putting his head to the
window on the change of horses. He has outriders and a horn to sound his
coming. His Lordship has a liver that must be mended, but also he has
a weakness for the gaming table. Or Lady Euphemia, wrapped in silks,
languishes mornings in her lodgings with a latest novel, but goes forth at
noon upon the Pantilles to shop in the stalls. A box of patches must be
bought. A lace flounce has caught her eye. Bless her dear eyes, as she
bends upon her purchase she is fair to look upon. The Grand Rout is set for
tonight. Who knows but that the Duke will put the tender question and will
ask her to name the happy day?

But these golden days are past. Tunbridge Wells has sunk from fashion. The
gaming tables are gone. A band still plays mornings in the Pantilles--or
did so before the war--but cheaper gauds are offered in the shops. Emerald
brooches are fallen to paste. In all the season there is scarcely a single
demand for a diamond garter. If there were now a Rout, the only dancers
would be stiff shadows from the past. The healing waters still trickle from
the ground and an old woman serves you for a penny, but the miracle has
gone. The old world is cured and dead.

Tunbridge Wells is visited now chiefly by old ladies whose husbands--to
judge by the black lace caps--have left Lombard Street for heaven. At the
hotel where I stopped, which was at the top of the Commons outside the
thicker town, I was the only man in the breakfast room. Two widows, each
with a tiny dog on a chair beside her, sat at the next table. This was
their conversation:

"Did you hear her last night?"

"Was it Flossie that I heard?"

"Yes. The poor dear was awake all night. She got her feet wet yesterday
when I let her run upon the grass."

But after breakfast--if the day is sunny and the wind sits in a favoring
quarter--one by one the widows go forth in their chairs. These are wicker
contrivances that hang between three wheels. Burros pull them, and men walk
alongside to hold their bridles. Down comes the widow. Down comes a maid
with her wraps. Down comes a maid with Flossie. The wraps are adjusted. The
widow is handed in. Her feet are wound around with comforters against a
draft. Her salts rest in her lap. Her ample bag of knitting is safe aboard.
Flossie is placed beside her. Proot! The donkey starts.

All morning the widow sits in the Pantilles and listens to the band and
knits. Flossie sits on the flagging at her feet with an intent eye upon the
ball of worsted. Twice in a morning--three times if the gods are kind--the
ball rolls to the pavement. Flossie has been waiting so long for this
to happen. It is the bright moment of her life--the point and peak of
happiness. She darts upon it. She paws it exultantly for a moment. Brief is
the rainbow and brief the Borealis. The finger of Time is swift.

The poppy blooms and fades. The maid captures the ball of worsted and
restores it.

It lies in the widow's lap. The band plays. The needles click to a long
tune. The healing waters trickle from the ground. The old woman whines
their merits. Flossie sits motionless, her head cocked and her eye upon the
ball. Perhaps the god of puppies will again be good to her.




ROADS OF MORNING


My grandfather's farm lay somewhere this side of the sunset, so near that
its pastures barely missed the splash of color. But from the city it was a
two hours' journey by horse and phaeton. My grandfather drove. I sat next,
my feet swinging clear of the lunchbox. My brother had the outside, a place
denied to me for fear that I might fall across the wheel. When we were
all set, my mother made a last dab at my nose--an unheeded smudge having
escaped my vigilance. Then my grandfather said, "Get up,"--twice, for the
lazy horse chose to regard the first summons as a jest. We start. The great
wheels turn. My brother leans across the guard to view the miracle. We
crunch the gravel. We are alive for excitement. My brother plays we are
a steamboat and toots. I toot in imitation, but higher up as if I were a
younger sort of steamboat. We hold our hands on an imaginary wheel and
steer. We scorn grocery carts and all such harbor craft. We are on a long
cruise. Street lights will guide us sailing home.

Of course there were farms to the south of the city and apples may have
ripened there to as fine a flavor, and to the east, also, doubtless there
were farms. It would be asking too much that the west should have all the
haystacks, cherry trees and cheese houses. If your judgment skimmed upon
the surface, you would even have found the advantage with the south. It was
prettier because more rolling. It was shaggier. The country to the south
tipped up to the hills, so sharply in places that it might have made its
living by collecting nickels for the slide. Indeed, one might think that a
part of the city had come bouncing down the slope, for now it lay resting
at the bottom, sprawled somewhat for its ease. Or it might appear--if your
belief runs on discarded lines--that the whole flat-bottomed earth had been
fouled in its celestial course and now lay aslant upon its beam with its
cargo shifted and spilled about.

The city streets that led to the south, which in those days ended in lanes,
popped out of sight abruptly at the top of the first ridge. And when the
earth caught up again with their level, already it was dim and purple and
tall trees were no more than a roughened hedge. But what lay beyond that
range of hills--what towns and cities--what oceans and forests--how beset
with adventure--how fearful after dark--these things you could not see,
even if you climbed to some high place and strained yourself on tiptoe. And
if you walked from breakfast to lunch--until you gnawed within and were but
a hollow drum--there would still be a higher range against the sky. There
are misty kingdoms on this whirling earth, but the ways are long and steep.

The lake lay to the north with no land beyond, the city to the east. But to
the west--

Several miles outside the city as it then was, and still beyond its
clutches, the country was cut by a winding river bottom with sharp edges of
shale. Down this valley Rocky River came brawling in the spring, over-fed
and quarrelsome. Later in the year--its youthful appetite having caught an
indigestion--it shrunk and wasted to a shadow. By August you could cross it
on the stones. The uproar of its former flood was marked upon the shale and
trunks of trees here and there were wedged, but now the river plays drowsy
tunes upon the stones. There is scarcely enough movement of water to flick
the sunlight. A leaf on its idle current is a lazy craft whose skipper
nods. There were hickory trees on the point above. May-apples grew in the
deep woods, and blackberries along the fences. And in the season sober
horses plowed up and down the fields with nodding heads, affirming their
belief in the goodness of the soil and their willingness to help in its
fruition.

Yet the very core of this valley in days past was a certain depth of water
at a turn of the stream. There was a clay bank above it and on it small
naked boys stood and daubed themselves. One of them put a band of clay
about himself by way of decoration. Another, by a more general smudge, made
himself a Hottentot and thereby gave his manners a wider scope and license.
But by daubing yourself entire you became an Indian and might vent yourself
in hideous yells, for it was amazing how the lungs grew stouter when the
clay was laid on thick. Then you tapped your flattened palm rapidly against
your mouth and released an intermittent uproar in order that the valley
might he warned of the deviltry to come. You circled round and round and
beat upon the ground in the likeness of a war dance. But at last, sated
with scalps, off you dived into the pool and came up a white man. Finally,
you stood on one leg and jounced the water from your ear, or pulled a
bloodsucker from your toes before he sapped your life--for this tiny
creature of the rocks was credited with the gift of prodigious inflation,
and might inhale you, blood, sinews, suspenders and all, if left to his
ugly purpose.

Farms should not be too precisely located; at least this is true of farms
which, like my grandfather's, hang in a mist of memory. I read once of a
wonderful spot--quite inferior, doubtless, to my grandfather's farm--which
was located by evil directions intentionally to throw a seeker off.
Munchausen, you will recall, in the placing of his magic countries, was not
above this agreeable villainy. Robinson Crusoe was loose and vague in the
placing of his island. It is said that Izaak Walton waved a hand obscurely
toward the stream where he had made a catch, but could not be cornered to a
nice direction, lest his pool be overrun. In early youth, I myself went, on
a mischievous hint, to explore a remote region which I was told lay in the
dark behind the kindling pile. But because I moved in a fearful darkness,
quite beyond the pale light from the furnace room, I lost the path. It did
not lead me to the peaks and the roaring waters.

But the farm was reached by more open methods. Dolly and the phaeton were
the chief instruments. First--if you were so sunk in ignorance as not to
know the road--you inquired of everybody for the chewing gum factory, to be
known by its smell of peppermint. Then you sought the high bridge over the
railroad tracks. Beyond was Kamm's Corners. Here, at a turn of the road,
was a general store whose shelves sampled the produce of this whole fair
world and the factories thereof. One might have thought that the proprietor
emulated Noah at the flood by bidding two of each created things to find a
place inside.

Beyond Kamm's Corners you came to the great valley. When almost down the
hill you passed a house with broken windows and unkept grass. This house,
by report, was haunted, but you could laugh at such tales while the morning
sun was up. At the bottom of the hill a bridge crossed the river, with
loose planking that rattled as though the man who made nails was dead.

Beyond the bridge, at the first rise of ground, the horse stopped--for I
assume that you drove a sagacious animal--by way of hint that every one
of sound limb get out and walk to the top of the hill. A suspicious horse
turned his head now and again and cast his eye upon the buggy to be sure
that no one climbed in again.

Presently you came to the toll-gate at the top and paid its keeper five
cents, or whatever large sum he demanded. Then your grandfather--if by
fortunate chance you happened to have one--asked after his wife and
children, and had they missed the croup; then told him his corn was looking
well.

My grandfather--for it is time you knew him--lived with us. Because of a
railway accident fifteen years before in which one of his legs was cut off
just below the knee, he had retired from public office. Several years of
broken health had been followed by years that were for the most part free
from suffering. My own first recollection reverts to these better years.
I recall a tall man--to my eyes a giant, for he was taller even than my
father--who came into the nursery as I was being undressed. There was a
wind in the chimney, and the windows rattled. He put his crutches against
the wall. Then taking me in his arms, he swung me aloft to his shoulder
by a series of somersaults. I cried this first time, but later I came to
demand the performance.

Once, when I was a little older, I came upon one of his discarded wooden
legs as I was playing in the garret of the house. It was my first
acquaintance with such a contrivance. It lay behind a pile of trunks and I
was, at the time, on my way to the center of the earth, for the cheerful
path dove into darkness behind the chimney. You may imagine my surprise. I
approached it cautiously. I viewed it from all sides by such dusty light as
fell between the trunks. Not without fear I touched it. It was unmistakably
a leg--but whose? Was it possible that there was a kind of Bluebeard in the
family, who, for his pleasure, lopped off legs? There had been no breath of
such a scandal. Yet, if my reading and studies were correct, such things
had happened in other families not very different from ours; not in our own
town maybe, but in such near-by places as Kandahar and Serendib--places
which in my warm regard were but as suburbs to our street, to be gained if
you persevered for a hundred lamp-posts. Or could the leg belong to Annie
the cook? Her nimbleness with griddle-cakes belied the thought: And once,
when the wind had swished her skirts, manifestly she was whole and sound.
Then all at once I knew it to be my grandfather's. Grown familiar, I pulled
it to the window. I tried it on, but made bad work of walking.

To the eye my grandfather had two legs all the way down and, except for
his crutches and an occasional squeak, you would not have detected his
infirmity. Evidently the maker did no more than imitate nature, although,
for myself, I used to wonder at the poverty of his invention. There would
be distinction in a leg, which in addition to its usual functions, would
also bend forward at the knee, or had a surprising sidewise joint--and
there would be profit, too, if one cared to make a show of it. The greatest
niggard on the street would pay two pins for such a sight.

As my grandfather was the only old gentleman of my acquaintance, a wooden
leg seemed the natural and suitable accompaniment of old age. Persons, it
appeared, in their riper years, cast off a leg, as trees dropped their
leaves. But my grandmother puzzled me. Undeniably she retained both of
hers, yet her hair was just as white, and she was almost as old. Evidently
this law of nature worked only with men. Ladies, it seemed, were not
deciduous. But how the amputation was effected in men--whether by day or
night--how the choice fell between the right and left--whether the wooden
leg came down the chimney (a proper entrance)--how soon my father would go
the way of all masculine flesh and cast his off--these matters I could not
solve. The Arabian Nights were silent on the subject. Aladdin's uncle,
apparently, had both his legs. He was too brisk in villainy to admit a
wooden leg. But then, he was only an uncle. If his history ran out to the
end, doubtless he would go with a limp in his riper days. The story of the
Bible--although it trafficked in such veterans as Methuselah--gave not a
hint. Abraham died full of years. Here would have been a proper test--but
the book was silent.

My grandfather in those days had much leisure time. He still kept an office
at the rear of the house, although he had given up the regular practice
of the law. But a few old clients lingered on, chiefly women who carried
children in their arms and old men without neckties who came to him for
free advice. These he guided patiently in their troubles, and he would sit
an hour to listen to a piteous story. In an extremity he gave them money,
or took a well-meant but worthless note. Often his callers overran the
dinner hour and my mother would have to jingle the dinner bell at the door
to rouse them. Occasionally he would be called on for a public speech, and
for several days he would be busy at his desk. Frequently he presided at
dinners and would tell a story and sing a song, for he had a fine bass
voice and was famous for his singing.

He read much in those last years in science. When he was not reading
Trowbridge to his grandchildren, it was Huxley to himself. But when his
eyes grew tired, he would on an occasion--if there was canning in the
house--go into the kitchen where my mother and grandmother worked, and help
pare the fruit. Seriously, as though he were engaged upon a game, he would
cut the skin into thinnest strips, unbroken to the end, and would hold up
the coil for us to see. Or if he broke it in the cutting it was a point
against him in the contest.

His diversion rather than his profit was the care and rental of about
twenty small houses, some of which he built to fit his pensioners. My
brother and myself often made the rounds with him in the phaeton. At most
of the houses he was affectionately greeted as "Jedge" and was held in long
conversations across the fence. And to see an Irishman was to see a friend.
They all knew him and said, "Good mornin'," as we passed. He and they were
good Democrats together.

I can see in memory a certain old Irishman in a red flannel shirt, with his
foot upon the hub, bending across the wheel and gesticulating in an endless
discussion of politics or crops, while my brother and I were impatient to
be off. Dolly was of course patient, for she had long since passed her
fretful youth. If by any biological chance it had happened that she had
been an old lady instead of a horse, she would have been the kind that
spent her day in a rocker with her knitting. Any one who gave Dolly an
excuse for standing was her friend. There she stood as though she wished
the colloquy to last forever.

It was seldom that Dolly lost her restraint. She would, indeed, when she
came near the stable, somewhat hasten her stride; and when we came on our
drives to the turning point and at last headed about for home, Dolly would
know it and show her knowledge by a quickening of the ears and the quiver
of a faint excitement. Yet Dolly lost her patience when there were flies.
Then she threw off all repression and so waved her tail that she regularly
got it across the reins. This stirred my grandfather to something not
far short of anger. How vigorously would he try to dislodge the reins
by pulling and jerking! Dolly only clamped down her tail the harder.
Experience showed that the only way was to go slowly and craftily and
without heat or temper--a slackening of the reins--a distraction of Dolly's
attention--a leaning across the dashboard--a firm grasping of the tail out
near the end--a sudden raising thereof. Ah! It was done. We all settled
back against the cushions. Or perhaps a friendly fly would come to our
assistance and Dolly would have to use her tail in another direction.

The whip was seldom used. Generally it stood in its socket. It was
ornamental like a flagstaff. It forgot its sterner functions. But Dolly
must have known the whip in some former life, for even a gesture toward the
socket roused her. If it was rattled she mended her pace for a block. But
if on a rare occasion my grandfather took it in his hand, Dolly lay one ear
back in our direction, for she knew then he meant business. And what an
excitement would arise in the phaeton! We held on tight for fear that she
might take it into her mild old head to run away.

But Dolly had her moments. One sunny summer afternoon while she grazed
peacefully in the orchard, with her reins wound around the whip handle--the
appropriate place on these occasions--she was evidently stung by a bee. My
brother was at the time regaling himself in a near-by blackberry thicket.
He looked up at an unusual sound. Without warning, Dolly had leaped to
action and was tearing around the orchard dragging the phaeton behind
her. She wrecked the top on a low hanging branch, then hit another tree,
severing thereby all connection between herself and the phaeton, and at
last galloped down the lane to the farm house, with the broken shafts and
harness dangling behind her. Kipling's dun "with the mouth of a bell and
the heart of Hell and the head of the gallows-tree," could hardly have
shown more spirit. It was as though one brief minute of a glorious youth
had come back to her. It was a last spurting of an old flame before it sunk
to ash.

My grandfather gave his leisure to his grandchildren. He carved for us with
his knife, with an especial knack for willow whistles. He showed us the
colors that lay upon the world when we looked at it through one of the
glass pendants of the parlor chandelier. He sat by us when we played
duck-on-the-rock. He helped us with our kites and gave a superintendence to
our toys. It is true that he was superficial with tin-tags and did not know
the difference in value between a Steam Engine tag--the rarest of them
all--and a common Climax, but we forgave him as one forgives a friend who
is ignorant of Persian pottery. He employed us as gardeners and put a
bounty on weeds. We watered the lawn together, turn by turn. When I was
no more than four years old, he taught us to play casino with him--and
afterwards bezique. How he cried out if he got a royal sequence! With what
excitement he announced a double bezique! Or if one of us seemed about to
score and lacked but a single card, how intently he contended for the last
few tricks to thwart our declaration! And if we got it despite his lead
of aces, how gravely he squinted on the cards against deception, with his
glasses forward on his nose!

When he took his afternoon nap and lay upon his back on the sofa in the
sitting-room, we made paper pin-wheels to see whether his breath would
stir them. This trick having come to his notice by a sudden awakening, he
sometimes thereafter played to be asleep and snored in such a mighty gust
that the wheels spun. He was like a Dutch tempest against a windmill.

If a Dime Museum came to town we made an afternoon of it. He took us to all
the circuses and gave us our choice of side-shows. We walked up and
down before the stretches of painted canvas, balancing in our desire a
sword-swallower against an Indian Princess. Most of the fat women and all
the dwarfs that I have known came to my acquaintance when in company with
my grandfather. As a young man, it was said, he once ran away from home to
join a circus as an acrobat, having acquired the trick of leaping upon a
running horse. I fancy that his knack of throwing us to his shoulder by a
double somersault was a recollection of his early days. You may imagine
with what awe we looked on him even though he now went on crutches. He was
the epitome of adventure, the very salt of excitement. It was better having
him than a pirate in the house. When the circus had gone and life was drab,
he was our tutor in the art of turning cart-wheels and making hand-stands
against the door.

And once, when we were away from him, he walked all morning about the
garden and in his loneliness he gathered into piles the pebbles that we had
dropped.

I was too young to know my grandfather in his active days when he was
prominent in public matters. His broader abilities are known to others. But
though more than twenty years have passed since his death, I remember his
tone of voice, his walk, his way of handling a crutch, all his tricks of
speech and conduct as though he had just left the room. And I can think of
nothing more beautiful than that a useful man who has faced the world for
seventy years and has done his part, should come back in his old age to the
nursery and be the playfellow of his grandchildren.

But the best holiday was a trip to the farm.

This farm--to which in our slow trot we have been so long a time in
coming--lay for a mile on the upper land, and its grain fields and pastures
looked down into the valley. The buildings, however, were set close to the
road and fixed their interest on such occasional wagons as creaked by. A
Switzer occupied the farm, who owned, in addition to the more immediate
members of his family, a cuckoo clock whose weights hung on long cords
which by Saturday night reached almost to the floor. When I have sat at his
table, I have neglected cheese and the lesser foods, when the hour came
near, in order not to miss the cuckoo's popping out. And in the duller
spaces, when the door was shut, I have fancied it sitting in the dark and
counting the minutes to itself.

The Switzer's specialty was the making of a kind of rubber cheese which one
could learn to like in time. Of the processes of its composition, I can
remember nothing except that when it was in the great press the whey ran
from its sides, but this may be common to all cheeses. I was once given a
cup of this whey to drink and I brightened, for until it was in my mouth,
I thought it was buttermilk. Beyond was the spring-house with cans of milk
set in the cool water and with a trickling sound beneath the boards. From
the spring-house there started those mysterious cow-paths that led down
into the great gorge that cut the farm. Here were places so deep that only
a bit of the sky showed and here the stones were damp. It was a place that
seemed to lie nearer to the confusion when the world was made, and rocks
lay piled as though a first purpose had been broken off. And to follow a
cow-path, regardless of where it led, was, in those days, the essence of
hazard; though all the while from the pastures up above there came the flat
safe tinkling of the bells.

The apple orchard--where Dolly was stung by the bee--was set on a fine
breezy place at the brow of the hill with the valley in full sight. The
trees themselves were old and decayed, but they were gnarled and crotched
for easy climbing. And the apples--in particular a russet--mounted to a
delicacy. On the other side of the valley, a half mile off as a bird would
fly, were the buildings of a convent, and if you waited you might hear
the twilight bell. To this day all distant bells come to my ears with a
pleasing softness, as though they had been cast in a quieter world. Stone
arrow-heads were found in a near-by field as often as the farmer turned up
the soil in plowing. And because of this, a long finger of land that put
off to the valley, was called Indian Point. Here, with an arm for pillow,
one might lie for a long hour on a sunny morning and watch the shadows of
clouds move across the lowland. A rooster crows somewhere far off--surely
of all sounds the drowsiest. A horse in a field below lifts up its head and
neighs. The leaves practice a sleepy tune. If one has the fortune to keep
awake, here he may lie and think the thoughts that are born of sun and
wind.

And now, although it is not yet noon, hunger rages in us. The pancakes, the
syrup, the toast and the other incidents of breakfast have disappeared
the way the rabbit vanishes when the magician waves his hand. The horrid
Polyphemus did not so crave his food. And as yet there is no comforting
sniff from the kitchen. Scrubbing and other secular matters engage the
farmer's wife. There is as yet not a faintest gurgle in the kettle.

To divert ourselves, we climb three trees and fall out of one. Is twelve
o'clock never to come? Have Time and the Hour grown stagnant? We eat apples
and throw the cores at the pig to hear him grunt. Is the great round sun
stuck? Have the days of Joshua come again? We walk a rail fence. Is it not
yet noon? Shrewsbury clock itself--reputed by scholars the slowest of all
possible clocks--could not so hold off. I snag myself--but it is nothing
that shows when I sit.

Ah! At last! My grandfather is calling from the house. We run back and
find that the lunch is ready and is laid upon a table with a red oil-cloth
cover. We apply ourselves. Silence....

The journey home started about five o'clock. There was one game we always
played. Each of us, having wisely squinted at the sky, made a reckoning and
guessed where we would be when the sun set. My grandfather might say the
high bridge. I named the Sherman House. But my brother, being precise,
judged it to a fraction of a telegraph pole. Beyond a certain turn--did we
remember?--well, it would be exactly sixteen telegraph poles further on.
What an excitement there was when the sun's lower rim was already below the
horizon! We stood on our knees and looked through the little window at
the back of the phaeton. With what suspicion we regarded my grandfather's
driving! Or if Dolly lagged, did it not raise a thought that she, too, was
in the plot against us? The sun sets. We cry out the victor.

The sky flames with color. Then deadens in the east. The dusk is falling.
The roads grow dark. Where run the roads of night? While there is light,
you can see the course they keep across the country--the dust of horses'
feet--a bridge--a vagrant winding on a hill beyond. All day long they are
busy with the feet of men and women and children shouting. Then twilight
comes, and the roads lead home to supper and the curling smoke above the
roof. But at night where run the roads? It's dark beyond the candle's
flare--where run the roads of night.

My brother and I have become sleepy. We lop over against my grandfather--

We awake with a start. There is a gayly lighted horse-car jingling beside
us. The street lights show us into harbor. We are home at last.




The Man Of Grub Street Comes From His Garret


I have come to live this winter in New York City and by good fortune I
have found rooms on a pleasant park. This park, which is but one block in
extent, is so set off from the thoroughfares that it bears chiefly the
traffic that is proper to the place itself. Grocery carts jog around and
throw out their wares. Laundry wagons are astir. A little fat tailor on an
occasion carries in an armful of newly pressed clothing with suspenders
hanging. Dogs are taken out to walk but are held in leash, lest a taste of
liberty spoil them for an indoor life. The center of the park is laid out
with grass and trees and pebbled paths, and about it is a high iron fence.
Each house has a key to the enclosure. Such social infection, therefore, as
gets inside the gates is of our own breeding. In the sunny hours nurses and
children air themselves in this grass plot. Here a gayly painted wooden
velocipede is in fashion. At this minute there are several pairs of fat
legs a-straddle this contrivance. It is a velocipede as it was first made,
without pedals. Beau Brummel--for the velocipede dates back to him--may
have walked forth to take the waters at Tunbridge Wells on a vehicle not
far different, but built to his greater stature. There is also a trickle
of drays and wagons across the park--a mere leakage from the streets, as
though the near-by traffic in the pressure had burst its pipes. But only at
morning and night when the city collects or discharges its people, are the
sidewalks filled. Then for a half hour the nozzle of the city plays a full
stream on us.

The park seems to be freer and more natural than the streets outside. A man
goes by gesticulating as though he practiced for a speech. A woman adjusts
her stocking on the coping below the fence with the freedom of a country
road. A street sweeper, patched to his office, tunes his slow work to fit
the quiet surroundings. Boys skate by or cut swirls upon the pavement in
the privilege of a playground.

My work--if anything so pleasant and unforced can carry the name--is
done at a window that overlooks this park. Were it not for several high
buildings in my sight I might fancy that I lived in one of the older
squares of London. There is a look of Thackeray about the place as though
the Osbornes might be my neighbors. A fat man who waddles off his steps
opposite, if he would submit to a change of coat, might be Jos Sedley
starting for his club to eat his chutney. If only there were a crest above
my bell-pull I might even expect Becky Sharp in for tea. Or occasionally I
divert myself with the fancy that I am of a still older day and that I have
walked in from Lichfield--I choose the name at hazard--with a tragedy in my
pocket, to try my fortune. Were it not for the fashion of dress in the park
below and some remnant of reason in myself, I could, in a winking moment,
persuade myself that my room is a garret and my pen a quill. On such
delusion, before I issued on the street to seek my coffee-house, I would
adjust my wig and dust myself of snuff.

But for my exercise and recreation--which for a man of Grub Street is
necessary in the early hours of afternoon when the morning fires have
fallen--I go outside the park. I have a wide choice for my wanderings. I
may go into the district to the east and watch the children play against
the curb. If they pitch pennies on the walk I am careful to go about, for
fear that I distract the throw. Or if the stones are marked for hop-scotch,
I squeeze along the wall. It is my intention--from which as yet my
diffidence withholds me--to present to the winner of one of these contests
a red apple which I shall select at a corner stand. Or an ice wagon pauses
in its round, and while the man is gone there is a pleasant thieving of
bits of ice. Each dirty cheek is stuffed as though a plague of mumps had
fallen on the street. Or there may be a game of baseball--a scampering
on the bases, a home-run down the gutter--to engage me for an inning.
Or shinny grips the street. But if a street organ comes--not a mournful
one-legged box eked out with a monkey, but a big machine with an extra man
to pull--the children leave their games. It was but the other day that I
saw six of them together dancing on the pavement to the music, with skirts
and pigtails flying. There was such gladness in their faces that the
musician, although he already had his nickel, gave them an extra tune. It
was of such persuasive gayety that the number of dancers at once went up to
ten and others wiggled to the rhythm. And for myself, although I am past my
sportive days, the sound of a street organ, if any, would inflame me to a
fox-trot. Even a surly tune--if the handle be quickened--comes from the box
with a brisk seduction. If a dirge once got inside, it would fret until it
came out a dancing measure.

In this part of town, on the better streets, I sometimes study the fashions
as I see them in the shops and I compare them with those of uptown stores.
Nor is there the difference one might suppose. The small round muff that
sprang up this winter in the smarter shops won by only a week over the
cheaper stores. Tan gaiters ran a pretty race. And I am now witness to
a dead heat in a certain kind of fluffy rosebud dress. The fabrics are
probably different, but no matter how you deny it, they are cut to a common
pattern.

In a poorer part of the city still nearer to the East River, where
smells of garlic and worse issue from cellarways, I came recently on
a considerable park. It was supplied with swings and teeters and drew
children on its four fronts. Of a consequence the children of many races
played together. I caught a Yiddish answer to an Italian question. I fancy
that a child here could go forth at breakfast wholly a Hungarian and come
home with a smack of Russian or Armenian added. The general games that
merged the smaller groups, aided in the fusion. If this park is not already
named--a small chance, for it shows the marks of age--it might properly be
called _The Park of the Thirty Nations_.

Or my inclination may take me to the lower city. Like a poor starveling
I wander in the haunts of wealth where the buildings are piled to forty
stories, and I spin out the ciphers in my brain in an endeavor to compute
the amount that is laid up inside. Also, lest I become discontented with my
poverty, I note the strain and worry of the faces that I meet. There is a
story of Tolstoi in which a man is whispered by his god that he may possess
such land as he can circle in a day. Until that time he had been living on
a fertile slope of sun and shadow, with fields ample for his needs. But
when the whisper came, at a flash, he pelted off across the hills. He ran
all morning, but as the day advanced his sordid ambition broadened and he
turned his course into a wider and still wider circle. Here a pleasant
valley tempted him and he bent his path to bring it inside his mark. Here
a fruitful upland led him off. As the day wore on he ran with a greater
fierceness, because he knew he would lose everything if he did not reach
his starting place before the sun went down. The sun was coming near the
rim of earth when he toiled up the last hill. His feet were cut by stones,
his face pinched with agony. He staggered toward the goal and fell across
it while as yet there was a glint of light. But his effort burst his heart.
Does the analogy hold on these narrow streets? To a few who sit in an inner
office, Mammon has made a promise of wealth and domination. These few run
breathless to gain a mountain. But what have the gods whispered to the ten
thousand who sit in the outer office, that they bend and blink upon their
ledgers? Have the gods whispered to them the promise of great wealth? Alas,
before them there lies only the dust and heat of a level road, yet they too
are broken at the sunset.

Less oppressive are the streets where commerce is more apparent. Here,
unless you would be smirched, it is necessary to walk fast and hold your
coat-tails in. Packing cases are going down slides. Bales are coming up in
hoists. Barrels are rolling out of wagons. Crates are being lifted in. Is
the exchange never to stop? Is no warehouse satisfied with what it has?
English, which until now you judged a soft concordant language, shows here
its range and mastery of epithet. And all about, moving and jostling the
boxes, are men with hooks. One might think that in a former day Captain
Cuttle had settled here to live and that his numerous progeny had kept the
place.

Often I ride on a bus top like a maharajah on an elephant, up near the
tusks, as it were, where the view is unbroken. I plan this trip so that I
move counter to the procession that goes uptown in the late afternoon. Is
there a scene like it in the world? The boulevards of Paris in times of
peace are hardly so gay. Fifth Avenue is blocked with motor cars. Fashion
has gone forth to select a feather. A ringlet has gone awry and must be
mended. The Pomeranian's health is served by sunlight. The Spitz must have
an airing. Fashion has wagged its head upon a Chinese vase--has indeed
squinted at it through a lorgnette against a fleck--and now lolls home to
dinner. Or style has veered an inch, and it has been a day of fitting. At
restaurant windows one may see the feeding of the over-fed. Men sit in club
windows and still wear their silk hats as though there was no glass between
them and the windy world. Footmen in boots and breeches sit as stiffly as
though they were toys grown large and had metal spikes below to hold them
to their boxes. They look like the iron firemen that ride on nursery
fire-engines. For all these sights the bus top is the best place.

And although we sit on a modest roof, the shopkeepers cater to us. For in
many of the stores, is there not an upper tier of windows for our use? The
commodities of this second story are quite as fine as those below. And the
waxen beauties who display the frocks greet us in true democracy with as
sweet a simper.

My friend G---- while riding recently on a bus top met with an experience
for which he still blushes.

There was a young woman sitting directly in front of him, and when he came
to leave, a sudden lurch threw him against her. When he recovered his
footing, which was a business of some difficulty, for the bus pitched upon
a broken pavement, what was his chagrin to find that a front button of
his coat had hooked in her back hair! Luckily G---- was not seized with a
panic. Rather, he labored cautiously--but without result. Nor could
she help in the disentanglement. Their embarrassment might have been
indefinitely prolonged--indeed, G---- was several blocks already down the
street--when he bethought him of his knife and so cut off the button. As he
pleasantly expressed it to the young woman, he would give her the choice of
the button or the coat entire.

Reader, are you inclined toward ferry boats? I cannot include those persons
who journey on them night and morning perfunctorily. These persons keep
their noses in their papers or sit snugly in the cabin. If the market is
up, they can hardly be conscious even that they are crossing a river.
Nor do I entirely blame them. If one kept shop on a breezy tip of the
Delectable Mountains with all the regions of the world laid out below,
he could not be expected to climb up for the hundredth time with a first
exhilaration, or to swing his alpenstock as though he were on a rare
holiday. If one had business across the Styx too often--although the
scenery on its banks is reputed to be unusual--he might in time sit below
and take to yawning. Father Charon might have to jog his shoulder to rouse
him when the boat came between the further piers.

But are you one of those persons who, not being under a daily compulsion,
rides upon a ferry boat for the love of the trip? Being in this class
myself, I laid my case the other night before the gateman, and asked
his advice regarding routes. He at once entered sympathetically into my
distemper and gave me a plan whereby with but a single change of piers
I might at an expense of fourteen cents cross the river four times at
different angles.

It was at the end of day and a light fog rested on the water. Nothing was
entirely lost, yet a gray mystery wrapped the ships and buildings. If New
Jersey still existed it was dim and shadowy as though its real life had
gone and but a ghost remained. Ferry boats were lighted in defiance of the
murk, and darted here and there at reckless angles. An ocean liner was
putting out, and several tugs had rammed their noses against her sides.
There is something engaging about a tug. It snorts with eagerness. It kicks
and splashes. It bursts itself to lend a hand. And how it butts with its
nose! Surely its forward cartilages are of triple strength, else in its
zest it would jam its nasal passages.

Presently we came opposite lower New York. Although the fog concealed the
outlines of the buildings, their lights showed through. This first hour of
dark is best, before the day's work is done and while as yet all of the
windows are lighted. The Woolworth Tower was suffused in a soft and shadowy
light. The other buildings showed like mountains of magic pin-pricks. It
was as though all the constellations of heaven on a general bidding had met
for conference.

The man of Grub Street, having by this time somewhat dispelled the fumes of
dullness from his head, descends from his ferry boat and walks to his quiet
park. There is a dull roar from the elevated railway on Third Avenue where
the last of the day's crowd goes home. The sidewalks are becoming empty.
There is a sheen of water on the pavement. In the winter murk there is a
look of Thackeray about the place as though the Sedleys or the Osbornes
might be his neighbors. If there were a crest above his bell-pull he might
even expect Becky Sharp in for tea.




Now that Spring is here


When the sun set last night it was still winter. The persons who passed
northward in the dusk from the city's tumult thrust their hands deep into
their pockets and walked to a sharp measure. But a change came in the
night. The north wind fell off and a breeze blew up from the south. Such
stars as were abroad at dawn left off their shrill winter piping--if it be
true that stars really sing in their courses--and pitched their voices to
April tunes. One star in particular that hung low in the west until the day
was up, knew surely that the Spring had come and sang in concert with the
earliest birds. There is a dull belief that these early birds shake off
their sleep to get the worm. Rather, they come forth at this hour to cock
their ears upon the general heavens for such new tunes as the unfaded
stars still sing. If an ear is turned down to the rummage of worms in the
earth--for to the superficial, so does the attitude attest--it is only that
the other ear may be turned upward to catch the celestial harmonies; for
birds know that if there is an untried melody in heaven it will sound first
across the clear pastures of the dawn. All the chirping and whistling
from the fields and trees are then but the practice of the hour. When the
meadowlark sings on a fence-rail she but cons her lesson from the stars.

It is on such a bright Spring morning that the housewife, duster in hand,
throws open her parlor window and looks upon the street. A pleasant park is
below, of the size of a city square, and already it stirs with the day's
activity. The housewife beats her cloth upon the sill and as the dust flies
off, she hears the cries and noises of the place. In a clear tenor she
is admonished that there is an expert hereabouts to grind her knives. A
swarthy baritone on a wagon lifts up his voice in praise of radishes and
carrots. His eye roves along the windows. The crook of a hungry finger will
bring him to a stand. Or a junkman is below upon his business. Yesterday
the bells upon his cart would have sounded sour, but this morning they
rattle agreeably, as though a brisker cow than common, springtime in her
hoofs, were jangling to her pasture. At the sound--if you are of country
training--you see yourself, somewhat misty through the years, barefoot in a
grassy lane, with stick in hand, urging the gentle beast. There is a subtle
persuasion in the junkman's call. In these tones did the magician, bawling
for old lamps, beguile Aladdin. If there were this morning in my lodging an
unrubbed lamp, I would toss it from the window for such magic as he might
extract from it. And if a fair Princess should be missing at the noon and
her palace be skipped from sight, it will follow on the rubbing of it.

The call of red cherries in the park--as you might guess from its Italian
source--is set to an amorous tune. What lady, smocked in morning cambric,
would not be wooed by such a voice? The gay fellow tempts her to a
purchase. It is but a decent caution--now that Spring is here--that the
rascal does not call his wares by moonlight. As for early peas this
morning, it is Pan himself who peddles them--disguised and smirched lest
he be caught in the deception--Pan who stamps his foot and shakes the
thicket--whose habit is to sing with reedy voice of the green willows that
dip in sunny waters. Although he now clatters his tins and baskets and
cries out like a merchant, his thoughts run to the black earth and the
shady hollows and the sound of little streams.

I have wondered as I have observed the housewives lingering at their
windows--for my window also looks upon the park--I have wondered that these
melodious street cries are not used generally for calling the wares of
wider sale. If a radish can be so proclaimed, there might be a lilt devised
in praise of other pleasing merceries--a tripping pizzicato for laces and
frippery--a brave trumpeting for some newest cereal. And should not the
latest book--if it be a tale of love, for these I am told are best offered
to the public in the Spring (sad tales are best for winter)--should not a
tale of love be heralded through the city by the singing of a ballad, with
a melting tenor in the part? In old days a gaudy rogue cried out upon the
broader streets that jugglers had stretched their rope in the market-place,
but when the bears came to town, the news was piped even to the narrowest
lanes that house-folk might bring their pennies.

With my thoughts set on the Spring I chanced to walk recently where the
theatres are thickest. It was on a Saturday afternoon and the walk was
crowded with amusement seekers. Presently in the press I observed a queer
old fellow carrying on his back a monstrous pack of umbrellas. He rang
a bell monotonously and professed himself a mender of umbrellas. He can
hardly have expected to find a customer in the crowd. Even a blinking
eye--and these street merchants are shrewd in these matters--must have told
him that in all this hurrying mass of people, the thoughts of no one ran
toward umbrellas. Rather, I think that he was taking an hour from the
routine of the day. He had trod the profitable side streets until truantry
had taken him. But he still made a pretext of working at his job and called
his wares to ease his conscience from idleness. Once when an unusually
bright beam of sunlight fell from between the clouds, he tilted up his hat
to get the warmth and I thought him guilty of a skip and syncopation in the
ringing of his bell, as if he too twitched pleasantly with the Spring and
his old sap was stirred.

I like these persons who ply their trades upon the sidewalk. My hatter--the
fellow who cleans my straw hat each Spring--is a partner of a bootblack.
Over his head as he putters with his soap and brushes, there hangs a rusty
sign proclaiming that he is famous for his cleaning all round the world. He
is so modest in his looks that I have wondered whether he really can read
the sign. Or perhaps like a true merchant, he is not squeamish at the
praise. As I have not previously been aware that any of his profession ever
came to general fame except the Mad Hatter of Wonderland, I have squinted
sharply at him to see if by chance it might be he, but there are no marks
even of a distant kinship. He does, however, bring my hat to a marvellous
whiteness and it may be true that he has really tended heads that are now
gone beyond Constantinople.

Bootblacks have a sense of rhythm unparalleled. Of this the long rag is
their instrument. They draw it once or twice across the shoe to set the key
and then they go into a swift and pattering melody. If there is an unusual
genius in the bootblack--some remnant of ancient Greece--he plays such a
lively tune that one's shoulders jig to it. If there were a dryad or other
such nimble creature on the street, she would come leaping as though
Orpheus strummed a tune, but the dance is too fast for our languid northern
feet.

Nowhere are apples redder than on a cart. Our hearts go out to Adam in the
hour of his temptation. I know one lady of otherwise careful appetite who
even leans toward dates if she may buy them from a cart. "Those dear dirty
dates," she calls them, but I cannot share her liking for them. Although
the cart is a beguiling market, dates so bought are too dusty to be eaten.
They rank with the apple-john. The apple-john is that mysterious leathery
fruit, sold more often from a stand than from a cart, which leans at the
rear of the shelf against the peppermint jars. For myself, although I do
not eat apple-johns, I like to look at them. They are so shrivelled and so
flat, as though a banana had caught a consumption. Or rather, in the older
world was there not a custom at a death of sending fruits to support the
lonesome journey? If so, the apple-john came untasted to the end. Indeed,
there is a look of old Egypt about the fruit. Whether my fondness for
gazing at apple-johns springs from a distant occasion when as a child I
once bought and ate one, or whether it arises from the fact that Falstaff
called Prince Hal a dried apple-john, is an unsolved question, but I like
to linger before a particularly shrivelled one and wonder what its youth
was like. Perhaps like many of its betters, it remained unheralded and
unknown all through its fresher years and not until the coming of its
wrinkled age was it at last put up to the common view. The apple-john sets
up kinship with an author.

The day of all fools is wisely put in April. The jest of the day resides in
the success with which credulity is imposed upon, and April is the month of
easiest credulity. Let bragging travellers come in April and hold us with
tales of the Anthropopagi! If their heads are said to grow beneath their
shoulders, still we will turn a credent ear. Indeed, it is all but sure
that Baron Munchausen came back from his travels in the Spring. When
else could he have got an ear? What man can look upon the wonders of the
returning year--the first blue skies, the soft rains, the tender sproutings
of green stalks without feeling that there is nothing beyond belief? If
such miracles can happen before his eyes, shall not the extreme range even
of travel or metaphysics be allowed? What man who has smelled the first
fragrance of the earth, has heard the birds on their northern flight and
has seen an April brook upon its course, will withhold his credence even
though the jest be plain?

I beg, therefore, that when you walk upon the street on the next day of
April fool, that you yield to the occasion. If an urchin points his finger
at your hat, humor him by removing it! Look sharply at it for a supposed
defect! His glad shout will be your reward. Or if you are begged piteously
to lift a stand-pipe wrapped to the likeness of a bundle, even though you
sniff the imposture, seize upon it with a will! It is thus, beneath these
April skies, that you play your part in the pageantry that marks the day.




The Friendly Genii


Do you not confess yourself to be several years past that time of greenest
youth when burnt cork holds its greatest charm? Although not fallen to a
crippled state, are you not now too advanced to smudge your upper lip and
stalk agreeably as a villain? Surely you can no longer frisk lightly in
a comedy. If you should wheeze and limp in an old man's part, with back
humped in mimicry, would you not fear that it bordered on the truth? But
doubtless there was a time when you ranged upon these heights--when Kazrac
the magician was not too heavy for your art. In those soaring days, let us
hope that you played the villain with a swagger, or being cast in a softer
role, that you won a pink and fluffy princess before the play was done.
Your earliest practice, it may be, was in rigging the parlor hangings as a
curtain with brown string from the pantry and safety pins. Although you had
no show to offer, you said "ding" three times--as is the ancient custom of
the stage when the actors are ready--and drew them wide apart. The cat
was the audience, who dozed with an ear twitching toward your activity. A
complaint that springs up in youth and is known as "snuffles" had kept you
out of school. It had gripped you hard at breakfast, when you were sunk in
fear of your lessons, but had abated at nine o'clock. Whether the cure came
with a proper healing of the nasal glands or followed merely on the ringing
of the school bell, must be left to a cool judgment.

Your theatre filled the morning. When Annie came on her quest for dust, you
tooted once upon your nose, just to show that a remnant of your infirmity
persisted, then put your golden convalescence on the making of your
curtain.

But in the early hours of afternoon when the children are once more upon
the street, you regret your illness. Here they come trooping by threes and
fours, carrying their books tied up in straps. One would think that they
were in fear lest some impish fact might get outside the covers to spoil
the afternoon. Until the morrow let two and two think themselves five at
least! And let Ohio be bounded as it will! Some few children skip ropes, or
step carefully across the cracks of the sidewalk for fear they spoil their
suppers. Ah!--a bat goes by--a glove--a ball! And now from a vacant lot
there comes the clamor of choosing sides. Is no mention to be made of
you--you, "molasses fingers"--the star left fielder--the timely batter?
What would you not give now for a clean bill of health? You rub your
offending nose upon the glass. What matters it with what deep rascality in
black mustachios you once strutted upon your boards? What is Hecuba to you?

My own first theatre was in the attic, a place of squeaks and shadows
to all except the valiant. In it were low, dark corners where the night
crawled in and slept. But in the open part where the roof was highest,
there was the theatre. Its walls were made of a red cambric of a flowered
pattern that still lingers with me, and was bought with a clatter of
pennies on the counter, together with nickels that had escaped my
extravagance at the soda fountain.

A cousin and I were joint proprietors. In the making of it, the hammer and
nails were mine by right of sex, while she stitched in womanish fashion on
the fabrics. She was leading woman and I was either the hero or the villain
as fitted to my mood. My younger cousin--although we scorned her for her
youth--was admitted to the slighter parts. She might daub herself with
cork, but it must be only when we were done. Nor did we allow her to carry
the paper knife--shaped like a dagger--which figured hugely in our plots.
If we gave her any word to speak, it was as taffy to keep her silent about
some iniquity that we had worked against her. In general, we judged her to
be too green and giddy for the heavy parts. At the most, she might take
pins at the door--for at such a trifle we displayed our talents--or play
upon the comb as orchestra before the rising of the curtain.

The usual approach to this theatre was the kitchen door, and those who came
to enjoy the drama sniffed at their very entrance the new-baked bread. A
pan of cookies was set upon a shelf and a row of apples was ranged along
the window sill. Of the ice-box around the corner, not a word, lest hunger
lead you off! As for the cook, although her tongue was tart upon a just
occasion and although she shooed the children with her apron, secretly she
liked to have them crowding through her kitchen.

Now if you, reader--for I assume you to be one of the gathering
audience--were of the kind careful on scrubbing days to scrape your feet
upon the iron outside and to cross the kitchen on the unwashed parts, then
it is likely that you stood in the good graces of the cook. Mark your
reward! As you journeyed upward, you munched upon a cookie and bit scallops
in its edge. Or if a ravenous haste was in you--as commonly comes up in the
middle afternoon--you waived this slower method and crammed yourself with
a recklessness that bestrewed the purlieus of your mouth. If your ears lay
beyond the muss, the stowage was deemed decent and in order.

Is there not a story in which children are tracked by an ogre through the
perilous wood by the crumbs they dropped? Then let us hope there is no ogre
lurking on these back stairs, for the trail is plain. It would be near the
top, farthest from the friendly kitchen, that the attack might come, for
there the stairs yielded to the darkness of the attic. There it was best
to look sharp and to turn the corners wide. A brave whistling kept out the
other noises.

It was after Aladdin had been in town that the fires burned hottest in us.
My grandfather and I went together to the matinee, his great thumb within
my fist. We were frequent companions. Together we had sat on benches in the
park and poked the gravel into patterns. We went to Dime Museums. Although
his eyes had looked longer on the world than mine, we seemed of an equal
age.

The theatre was empty as we entered. We carried a bag of candy against a
sudden appetite--colt's foot, a penny to the stick. Here and there ushers
were clapping down the seats, sounds to my fancy not unlike the first corn
within a popper. Somewhere aloft there must have been a roof, else the day
would have spied in on us, yet it was lost in the gloom. It was as though
a thrifty owner had borrowed the dusky fabrics of the night to make his
cover. The curtain was indistinct, but we knew it to be the Stratford
Church and we dimly saw its spire.

Now, on the opening of a door to the upper gallery, there was a scampering
to get seats in front, speed being whetted by a long half hour of waiting
on the stairs. Ghostly, unbodied heads, like the luminous souls of lost
mountaineers--for this was the kind of fiction, got out of the Public
Library, that had come last beneath my thumb--ghostly heads looked down
upon us across the gallery rail.

And now, if you will tip back your head like a paper-hanger--whose Adam's
apple would seem to attest a life of sidereal contemplation--you will see
in the center of the murk above you a single point of light. It is the
spark that will ignite the great gas chandelier. I strain my neck to the
point of breaking. My grandfather strains his too, for it is a game between
us which shall announce the first spurting of the light. At last! We cry
out together. The spark catches the vent next to it. It runs around the
circle of glass pendants. The whole blazes up. The mountaineers come to
life. They lean forward on their elbows.

From the wings comes the tuning of the violins. A flute ripples up and down
in a care-free manner as though the villain Kazrac were already dead and
virtue had come into its own. The orchestra emerges from below. Their
calmness is but a pretense. Having looked on such sights as lie behind the
curtain, having trod such ways, they should be bubbling with excitement.
Yet observe the bass viol! How sodden is his eye! How sunken is his gaze!
With what dull routine he draws his bow, as though he knew naught but
sleepy tunes! If there be any genie in the place, as the program says, let
him first stir this sad fellow from his melancholy!

We consult our programs. The first scene is the magician's cave where he
plans his evil schemes. The second is the Chinese city where he pretends to
be Aladdin's uncle. And for myself, did a friendly old gentleman offer me
lollypops and all-day-suckers--for so did the glittering baubles present
themselves across the footlights--like Aladdin I, too, would not have
squinted too closely on his claim. Gladly I would have gone off with him on
an all-day picnic toward the Chinese mountains.

We see a lonely pass in the hills, the cave of jewels (splendid to the eye
of childhood) where the slave of the lamp first appears, and finally the
throne-room with Aladdin seated safely beside his princess.

Who knows how to dip a pen within the twilight? Who shall trace the figures
of the mist? The play is done. We come out in silence. Our candy is but a
remnant. Darkness has fallen. The pavements are wet and shining, so that
the night might see his face, if by chance the old fellow looked our way.

All about there are persons hurrying home with dinner-pails, who, by their
dull eyes, seem never to have heard what wonders follow on the rubbing of a
lamp.

But how the fires leaped up--how ambition beat within us--how our attic
theatre was wrought to perfection--how the play came off and wracked the
neighborhood of its pins--with what grace I myself acted Aladdin--these
things must be written by a vain and braggart pen.




Mr. Pepys Sits in the Pit


When it happens that a man has risen to be a member of Parliament, the
Secretary of the British Navy and the President of the Royal Society, when
he has become the adviser of the King and is moreover the one really bright
spot in that King's reign, it is amazing that considerably more than one
hundred years after his death, when the navy that he nurtured dominates the
seven seas, that he himself on a sudden should be known, not for his larger
accomplishments, but as a kind of tavern crony and pot-companion. When he
should be standing with fame secure in a solemn though dusty niche in the
Temple of Time, it is amazing that he should be remembered chiefly for
certain quarrels with his wife and as a frequenter of plays and summer
gardens.

Yet this is the fate of Samuel Pepys. Before the return of the Stuarts he
held a poor clerkship in the Navy Office and cut his quill obscurely at
the common desk. At the Restoration, partly by the boost of influence, but
chiefly by his substantial merit, he mounted to several successively higher
posts. The Prince of Wales became his friend and patron and when he became
Lord High Admiral he took Pepys with him in his advancement. Thus in 1684,
Pepys became Secretary of the Navy. When later the Prince of Wales became
King James II, Pepys, although his office remained the same, came to quite
a pinnacle of administrative power. He was shrewd and capable in the
conduct of his position and brought method to the Navy Office. He was a
prime factor in the first development of the British Navy. Later victories
that were to sweep the seas may be traced in part to him. Nelson rides upon
his shoulders. These achievements should have made his fame secure. But
on a sudden he gained for posterity a less dignified although a more
interesting and enduring renown.

In life, Samuel Pepys walked gravely in majestical robe with full-bottomed
wig and with ceremonial lace flapping at his wrists. Every step, if his
portrait is to be believed, was a bit of pageantry. Such was his fame, that
if his sword but clacked a warning on the pavement, it must have brought
the apprentices to the windows. Tradesmen laid down their wares to get a
look at him. Fat men puffed and strained to gain the advantage of a sill.
Fashionable ladies peeped from brocaded curtains and ogled for his regard.
Or if he went by chair, the carriers held their noses up as though offended
by the common air. When he spoke before the Commons, the galleries were
hushed. He gave his days to the signing of stiff parchments--Admiralty
Orders or what not. He checked the King himself at the council table. In
short, he was not only a great personage, but also he was quite well aware
of the fact and held himself accordingly.

But now many years have passed, and Time, that has so long been at bowls
with reputations, has acquired a moderate skill in knocking them down. Let
us see how it fares with Pepys! Some men who have been roguish in their
lives have been remembered by their higher accomplishments. A string
of sonnets or a novel or two, if it catches the fancy, has wiped out a
tap-room record. The winning of a battle has obliterated a meanly spent
youth. It is true that for a while an old housewife who once lived on the
hero's street will shake a dubious finger on his early pranks. Stolen
apples or cigarettes behind the barn cram her recollection. But even a
village reputation fades. In time the sonnets and glorious battle have the
upper place. But things went the other way with Pepys. Rather, his fate
is like that of Zeus, who--if legend is to be trusted--was in his life a
person of some importance whose nod stirred society on Olympus, but who is
now remembered largely for his flirtations and his braggart conduct. A not
unlike evil has fallen on the magnificent Mr. Pepys.

This fate came to him because--as the world knows--it happened that for
a period of ten years in comparative youth, he wrote an interesting and
honest diary. He began this diary in 1659, while he was still a poor clerk
living with his wife in a garret, and ended it in 1669, when, although he
had emerged from obscurity, his greater honors had not yet been set on him.
All the facts of his life during this period are put down, whether good or
bad, small or large, generous or mean. He writes of his mornings spent in
work at his office, of his consultations with higher officials. There
is much running to and fro of business. The Dutch war bulks to a proper
length. Parliament sits through a page at a stretch. Pepys goes upon the
streets in the days of the plague and writes the horror of it--the houses
marked with red crosses and with prayers scratched beneath--the stench and
the carrying of dead bodies. He sees the great fire of London from his
window on the night it starts; afterwards St. Paul's with its roofs fallen.
He is on the fleet that brings Charles home from his long travels, and
afterwards when Charles is crowned, he records the processions and the
crowds. But also Pepys quarrels with his wife and writes it out on paper.
He debauches a servant and makes a note of it. He describes a supper at an
ale-house, and how he plays on the flute. He sings "Beauty Retire," a song
of his own making, and tells how his listeners "cried it up."

In consequence of this, Samuel Pepys is now known chiefly for his
attentions to the pretty actresses of Drury Lane, for kissing Nell Gwynne
in her tiring-room, for his suppers with "the jade" Mrs. Knipp, for his
love of a tune upon the fiddle, for coming home from Vauxhall by wherry
late at night, "singing merrily" down the river. Or perhaps we recall him
best for burying his wine and Parmazan cheese in his garden at the time
of the Fire, or for standing to the measure of Mr. Pin the tailor for a
"camlett cloak with gold buttons," or for sitting for his portrait in an
Indian gown which he "hired to be drawn in." Who shall say that this is not
the very portrait by which we have fancied him stalking off to Commons?
Could the apprentices have known in what a borrowed majesty he walked,
would they not have tossed their caps in mirth and pointed their dusky
fingers at him?

Or we remember that he once lived in a garret, and that his wife, "poor
wretch," was used to make the fire while Samuel lay abed, and that she
washed his "foul clothes"--that by degrees he came to be wealthy and
rode in his own yellow coach--that his wife went abroad in society "in
a flowered tabby gown"--that Pepys forsook his habits of poverty and
exchanged his twelve-penny seat in the theatre gallery for a place in the
pit--and that on a rare occasion (doubtless when he was alone and there was
but one seat to buy) he arose to the extravagance of a four-shilling box.

Consequently, despite the weightier parts of the diary, we know Pepys
chiefly in his hours of ease. Sittings and consultations are so dry. If
only the world would run itself decently and in silence! Even a meeting of
the Committee for Tangier--when the Prince of Wales was present and such
smaller fry as Chancellors--is dull and is matter for a skipping eye.

If a session of Parliament bulks to a fat paragraph and it happens that
there is a bit of deviltry just below at the bottom of the page--maybe no
more than a clinking of glasses (or perhaps Nell Gwynne's name pops in
sight)--bless us how the eye will hurry to turn the leaf on the chance
of roguery to come! Who would read through a long discourse on Admiralty
business, if it be known before that Pepys is engaged with the pretty Mrs.
Knipp for a trip to Bartholomew Fair to view the dancing horse, and that
the start is to be made on the turning of the page? Or a piece of scandal
about Lady Castlemaine, how her nose fell out of joint when Mrs. Stuart
came to court--such things tease one from the sterner business.

And for these reasons, we have been inclined to underestimate the
importance of Pepys' diary. Francis Jeffrey, who wrote long ago about
Pepys, evidently thought that he was an idle and unprofitable fellow and
that the diary was too much given to mean and petty things. But in reality
the diary is an historical mine. Even when Pepys plays upon the surface,
he throws out facts that can be had nowhere else. No one would venture to
write of Restoration life without digging through his pages. Pepys wrote in
a confused shorthand, maybe against the eye of his wife, from whom he had
reason to conceal his offenses. The papers lay undeciphered until 1825,
when a partial publication was made. There were additions by subsequent
editors until now it appears that the Wheatley text of 1893-1899 is final.
But ever since 1825, the diary has been judged to be of high importance in
the understanding of the first decade of the Restoration.

If some of the weightier parts are somewhat dry, there are places in which
a lighter show of personality is coincident with real historical data.
Foremost are the pages where Pepys goes to the theatre.

More than Charles II was restored in 1660. Among many things of more
importance than this worthless King, the theatre was restored. Since the
close of Elizabethan times it had been out of business. More than thirty
years before, Puritanism had snuffed out its candles and driven its
fiddlers to the streets. But Puritanism, in its turn, fell with the return
of the Stuarts. Pepys is a chief witness as to what kind of theatre it was
that was set up in London about the year 1660. It was far different from
the Elizabethan theatre. It came in from the Bankside and the fields to the
north of the city and lodged itself on the better streets and squares. It
no longer patterned itself on the inn-yard, but was roofed against the
rain. The time had been when the theatre was cousin to the bear-pit. They
were ranged together on the Bankside and they sweat and smelled like
congenial neighbors. But these days are past. Let Bartholomew Fair be as
rowdy as it pleases, let acrobats and such loose fellows keep to Southwark,
the theatre has risen in the world! It has put on a wig, as it were, it has
tied a ribbon to itself and has become fashionable. And although it has
taken on a few extra dissolute habits, they are of the genteelest kind and
will make it feel at home in the upper circles.

But also the theatre introduced movable scenery. There is an attempt toward
elaboration of stage effect. "To the King's playhouse--" says Pepys, "a
good scene of a town on fire." Women take parts. An avalanche of new plays
descends on it. Even the old plays that have survived are garbled to suit a
change of taste.

But if you would really know what kind of theatre it was that sprang up
with the Stuarts and what the audiences looked like and how they behaved,
you must read Pepys. With but a moderate use of fancy, you can set out with
him in his yellow coach for the King's house in Drury Lane. Perhaps hunger
nips you at the start. If so, you stop, as Pepys pleasantly puts it, for a
"barrel of oysters." Then, having dusted yourself of crumbs, you take the
road again. Presently you come to Drury Lane. Other yellow coaches are
before you. There is a show of foppery on the curb and an odor of smoking
links. A powdered beauty minces to the door. Once past the doorkeeper, you
hear the cries of the orange women going up and down the aisles. There is a
shuffling of apprentices in the gallery. A dandy who lolls in a box with a
silken leg across the rail, scrawls a message to an actress and sends it
off by Orange Moll. Presently Castlemaine enters the royal box with the
King. There is a craning of necks, for with her the King openly "do
discover a great deal of familiarity." In other boxes are other fine ladies
wearing vizards to hold their modesty if the comedy is free. A board breaks
in the ceiling of the gallery and dust falls in the men's hair and the
ladies' necks, which, writes Pepys, "made good sport." Or again, "A
gentleman of good habit, sitting just before us, eating of some fruit in
the midst of the play, did drop down as dead; being choked, but with much
ado Orange Moll did thrust her finger down his throat and brought him to
life again." Or perhaps, "I sitting behind in a dark place, a lady spit
backward upon me by a mistake, not seeing me, but after seeing her to be a
very pretty lady, I was not troubled at it at all."

At a change of scenes, Mrs. Knipp spies Pepys and comes to the pit door. He
goes with her to the tiring-room. "To the women's shift," he writes,
"where Nell was dressing herself, and was all unready, and is very pretty,
prettier than I thought.... But to see how Nell cursed for having so few
people in the pit, was pretty."--"But Lord! their confidence! and how
many men do hover about them as soon as they come off the stage, and how
confident they are in their talk!" Or he is whispered a bit of gossip, how
Castlemaine is much in love with Hart, an actor of the house. Then Pepys
goes back into the pit and lays out a sixpence for an orange. As the play
nears its end, footmen crowd forward at the doors. The epilogue is spoken.
The fiddles squeak their last. There is a bawling outside for coaches.

"Would it fit your humor," asks Mr. Pepys, when we have been handed to our
seats, "would it fit your humor, if we go around to the Rose Tavern for
some burnt wine and a breast of mutton off the spit? It's sure that some
brave company will fall in, and we can have a tune. We'll not heed the
bellman. We'll sit late, for it will be a fine light moonshine morning."




To an Unknown Reader


Once in a while I dream that I come upon a person who is reading a book
that I have written. In my pleasant dreams these persons do not nod
sleepily upon my pages, and sometimes I fall in talk with them. Although
they do not know who I am, they praise the book and name me warmly among
my betters. In such circumstance my happy nightmare mounts until I ride
foremost with the giants. If I could think that this disturbance of my
sleep came from my diet and that these agreeable persons arose from a
lobster or a pie, nightly at supper I would ply my fork recklessly among
the platters.

But in a waking state these meetings never come. If an article of mine is
ever read at all, it is read in secret like the Bible. Once, indeed, in a
friend's house I saw my book upon the table, but I suspect that it had been
dusted and laid out for my coming. I request my hostess that next time, for
my vanity, she lay the book face down upon a chair, as though the grocer's
knock intruded. Or perhaps a huckster's cart broke upon her enjoyment.
Let it be thought that a rare bargain--tender asparagus or the first
strawberries of the summer--tempted her off my pages! Or maybe there was
red rhubarb in the cart and the jolly farmer, as he journeyed up the
street, pitched it to a pleasing melody. Dear lady, I forgive you. But let
us hope no laundryman led you off! Such discord would have marred my book.

I saw once in a public library, as I went along the shelves, a volume of
mine which gave evidence to have been really read. The record in front
showed that it had been withdrawn one time only. The card was blank
below--but once certainly it had been read. I hope that the book went out
on a Saturday noon when the spirits rise for the holiday to come, and that
a rainy Sunday followed, so that my single reader was kept before his fire.
A dull patter on the window--if one sits unbuttoned on the hearth--gives
a zest to a languid chapter. The rattle of a storm--if only the room be
snug--fixes the attention fast. Therefore, let the rain descend as though
the heavens rehearsed for a flood! Let a tempest come out of the west! Let
the chimney roar as it were a lion! And if there must be a clearing, let
it hold off until the late afternoon, lest it sow too early a distaste for
indoors and reading! There is scarcely a bookworm who will not slip his
glasses off his nose, if the clouds break at the hour of sunset when the
earth and sky are filled with a green and golden light. I took the book off
the library shelf and timidly glancing across my shoulder for fear that
some one might catch me, I looked along the pages. There was a thumb mark
in a margin, and presently appeared a kindly stickiness on the paper as
though an orange had squirted on it. Surely there had been a human being
hereabouts. It was as certain as when Crusoe found the footprints in the
sand. Ah, I thought, this fellow who sits in the firelight has caught an
appetite. Perhaps he bit a hole and sucked the fruit, and the skin has
burst behind. Or I wave the theory and now conceive that the volume was
read at breakfast. If so, it is my comfort that in those dim hours it stood
propped against his coffee cup.

But the trail ended with the turning of the page. There were, indeed,
further on, pencil checks against one of the paragraphs as if here the book
had raised a faint excitement, but I could not tell whether they sprang
up in derision or in approval. Toward the end there were uncut leaves, as
though even my single reader had failed in his persistence.

Being swept once beyond a usual caution, I lamented to my friend F---- of
the neglect in which readers held me, to which the above experience in
a library was a rare exception. F---- offered me such consolation as he
could, deplored the general taste and the decadence of the times, and said
that as praise was sweet to everyone, he, as far as he himself was able,
offered it anonymously to those who merited it. He was standing recently
in a picture gallery, when a long-haired man who stood before one of the
pictures was pointed out to him as the artist who had painted it. At once
F---- saw his opportunity to confer a pleasure, but as there is a touch of
humor in him, he first played off a jest. Lounging forward, he dropped his
head to one side as artistic folk do when they look at color. He made a
knot-hole of his fingers and squinted through. Next he retreated across the
room and stood with his legs apart in the very attitude of wisdom. He cast
a stern eye upon the picture and gravely tapped his chin. At last when the
artist was fretted to an extremity, F---- came forward and so cordially
praised the picture that the artist, being now warmed and comforted,
presently excused himself in a high excitement and rushed away to start
another picture while the pleasant spell was on him.

Had I been the artist, I would have run from either F----'s praise or
disapproval. As an instance, I saw a friend on a late occasion coming from
a bookstore with a volume of suspicious color beneath his arm. I had been
avoiding that particular bookstore for a week because my book lay for sale
on a forward table. And now when my friend appeared, a sudden panic seized
me and I plunged into the first doorway to escape. I found myself facing a
soda fountain. For a moment, in my blur, I could not account for the
soda fountain, or know quite how it had come into my life. Presently an
interne--for he was jacketted as if he walked a hospital--asked me what I'd
have.

Still somewhat dazed, in my discomposure, having no answer ready, my
startled fancy ran among the signs and labels of the counter until I
recalled that a bearded man once, unblushing in my presence, had ordered
a banana flip. I got the fellow's ear and named it softly. Whereupon he
placed a dead-looking banana across a mound of ice-cream, poured on colored
juices as though to mark the fatal wound and offered it to me. I ate a few
bites of the sickish mixture until the streets were safe.

I do not know to what I can attribute my timidity. Possibly it arises from
the fact that until recently my writing met with uniform rejection and
failure. For years I wrote secretly in order that few persons might know
how miserably I failed. I answered upon a question that I had given up the
practice, that I now had no time for it, that I scribbled now and then
but always burned it. All that while I gave my rare leisure and my stolen
afternoons--the hours that other men give to golf and sleep and sitting
together--these hours I gave to writing. On a holiday I was at it early. On
Saturday when other folks were abroad, I sat at my desk. It was my grief
that I was so poor a borrower of the night that I blinked stupidly on my
papers if I sat beyond the usual hour. Writing was my obsession. I need no
pity for my failures, for although I tossed my cap upon a rare acceptance,
my deeper joy was in the writing. That joy repeated failures could not
blunt.

There are paragraphs that now lie yellow in my desk with their former
meaning faded, that still recall as I think of them the first exaltation
when I wrote them--feverishly in a hot emotion. In those days I thought
that I had caught the sunlight on my pen, and the wind and the moon and the
spinning earth. I thought that the valleys and the mountains arose from the
mist obedient to me. If I splashed my pen, in my warm regard it was the
roar and fury of the sea. It was really no more than my youth crying out.
And, alas, my thoughts and my feelings escaped me when I tried to put them
down on paper, although I did not know it then. Perhaps they were too
vagrant to be held. And yet these paragraphs that might be mournful records
of failure, fill me with no more than a tender recollection for the boy
who wrote them. The worn phrases now beg their way with broken steps. Like
shrill and piping minstrels they whine and crack a melody that I still
remember in its freshness.

But perhaps, reader, we are brothers in these regards. Perhaps you, too,
have faded papers. Or possibly, even on a recent date, you sighed your soul
into an essay or a sonnet, and you now have manuscript which you would like
to sell. Do not mistake me! I am not an editor, nor am I an agent for these
wares. Rather I speak as a friend who, having many such hidden sorrows,
offers you a word of comfort. To a desponding Hamlet I exclaim, "'Tis
common, my Lord." I have so many friends that have had an unproductive
fling toward letters, that I think the malady is general. So many books are
published and flourish a little while in their bright wrappers, but yours
and theirs and mine waste away in a single precious copy.

I am convinced that a close inspection of all desks--a federal matter as
though Capital were under fire--would betray thousands of abandoned novels.
There may be a few stern desks that are so cluttered with price-sheets and
stock-lists that they cannot offer harborage to a love tale. Standing desks
in particular, such as bookkeepers affect, are not always chinked
with these softer plots. And rarely there is a desk so smothered in
learning--reeking so of scholarship--as not to admit a lighter nook for
the tucking of a sea yarn. Even so, it was whispered to me lately that
Professor B----, whose word shakes the continent, holds in a lower drawer
no fewer than three unpublished historical novels, each set up with a full
quota of smugglers and red bandits. One of these stories deals scandalously
with the abduction of an heiress, but this must be held in confidence. The
professor is a stoic before his class, but there's blood in the fellow.

There is, therefore, little use in your own denial. You will recall that
once, when taken to a ruined castle, you brooded on the dungeons until a
plot popped into your head. You crammed it with quaint phrasing from the
chroniclers. You stuffed it with soldiers' oaths. "What ho! landlord,"
you wrote gayly at midnight, "a foaming cup, good sir. God pity the poor
sailors that take the sea this night!" And on you pelted with your plot to
such conflicts and hair-breadth escapes as lay in your contrivance.

These things you have committed. Good sir, we are of a common piece. Let us
salute as brothers! And therefore, as to a comrade, I bid you continue in
your ways. And that you may not lack matter for your pen, I warmly urge
you, when by shrewdest computation you have exhausted the plots of
adventure and have worn your villains thin, that you proceed in quieter
vein. I urge you to an April mood, for the winds of Spring are up and
daffodils nod across the garden. There is black earth in the Spring and
green hilltops, and there is also the breath of flowers along the fences
and the sound of water for your pen to prattle of.




A Plague of All Cowards


Having written lately against the dog, several acquaintances have asked me
to turn upon the cat, and they have been good enough to furnish me with
instances of her faithlessness. Also, a lady with whom I recently sat at
dinner, inquired of me on the passing of the fish, whether I had ever
properly considered the cow, which she esteemed a most mischievous animal.
One of them had mooed at her as she crossed a pasture and she had hastily
climbed a fence. I get a good many suggestions first and last. I was once
taken to a Turkish bath for no other reason--as I was afterwards told--than
that it might supply me with a topic. Odd books have been put in my way.
A basket of school readers was once lodged with me, with a request that I
direct my attention to the absurd selection of the poems. I have been urged
to go against car conductors and customs men. On one occasion I received a
paper of tombstone inscriptions, with a note of direction how others might
be found in a neighboring churchyard if I were curious. A lady in whose
company I camped last summer has asked me to give a chapter to it. We were
abroad upon a lake in the full moon--we were lost upon a mountain--twice a
canoe upset--there were the usual jests about cooking. These things might
have filled a few pages agreeably, yet so far they have given me only a
paragraph.

But I am not disposed toward any of these subjects, least of all the cat,
upon which I look--despite the coldness of her nature--as a harmless and
comforting appendage of the hearth-rug. I would no more prey upon her
morals than I would the morals of the andirons. I choose, rather, to slip
to another angle of the question and say a few words about cowards, among
whom I have already confessed that I number myself.

In this year of battles, when physical courage sits so high, the reader--if
he is swept off in the general opinion--will expect under such a title
something caustic. He will think that I am about to loose against all
cowards a plague of frogs and locusts as if old Egypt had come again. But
cowardice is its own punishment. It needs no frog to nip it. Even the
sharp-toothed locust--for in the days that bordered so close upon the
mastodon, the locust could hardly have fallen to the tender greenling we
know today--even the locust that once spoiled the Egyptians could not now
add to the grief of a coward.

And yet--really I hesitate. I blush. My attack will be too intimate; for I
have confessed that I am not the very button on the cap of bravery. I have
indeed stiffened myself to ride a horse, a mightier feat than driving him
because of the tallness of the monster and his uneasy movement, as though
his legs were not well socketed and might fall out on a change of gaits. I
have ridden on a camel in a side-show, but have found my only comfort in
his hump. I have stroked the elephant. In a solemn hour of night I have
gone downstairs to face a burglar. But I do not run singing to these
dangers. While your really brave fellow is climbing a dizzy staircase to
the moon--I write in figure--I would shake with fear upon a lower platform.

Perhaps you recall Mr. Tipp of the Elia essays. "Tipp," says his pleasant
biographer, "never mounted the box of a stage-coach in his life; or leaned
against the rails of a balcony; or walked upon the ridge of a parapet; or
looked down a precipice; or let off a gun." I cannot follow Tipp, it may
be, to his extreme tremors--my hair will not rise to so close a likeness of
the fretful porcupine--yet in a measure we are in agreement. We are, as it
were, cousins, with the mark of our common family strong on both of us.

There are persons who, when in your company on a country walk, will steal
apples, not with a decent caution from a tree along the fence, but far
afield. If there are grapes, they will not wait for a turn of the road,
but will pluck them in the open. Or maybe in your wandering you come on a
half-built house. You climb in through a window to look about. Here the
stairs will go. The ice-box will be set against this wall. But if your
companion is one of valor's minions, he will not be satisfied with this
safe and agreeable research--this mild speculation on bath-rooms--this
innocent placing of a stove. He must go aloft. He has seen a ladder and
yearns to climb it. The footing on the second story is bad enough. If you
fall between the joists, you will clatter to the basement. It is hard to
realize that such an open breezy place will ever be cosy and warm with
fires, and that sleepy folk will here lie snugly a-bed on frosty mornings.
But still the brazen fellow is not content. A ladder leads horribly to the
roof. For myself I will climb until the tip of my nose juts out upon the
world--until it sprouts forth to the air from the topmost timbers: But I
will go no farther. But if your companion sees a scaffold around a chimney,
he must perch on it. For him, a dizzy plank is a pleasant belvedere from
which to view the world.

The bravery of this kind of person is not confined to these few matters.
If you happen to go driving with him, he will--if the horse is of the kind
that distends his nostrils--on a sudden toss you the reins and leave you to
guard him while he dispatches an errand. If it were a motor car there would
be a brake to hold it. If it were a boat, you might throw out an anchor. A
butcher's cart would have a metal drag. But here you sit defenseless--tied
to the whim of a horse--greased for a runaway. The beast Dobbin turns his
head and holds you with his hard eye. There is a convulsive movement along
his back, a preface, it may be, to a sudden seizure. A real friend would
have loosed the straps that run along the horse's flanks. Then, if any
deviltry take him, he might go off alone and have it out.

I have in mind a livery stable in Kalamazoo. Myself and another man of
equal equestrianism were sent once to bring out a thing called a surrey and
a pair of horses. Do you happen to be acquainted with Blat's Horse Food? If
your way lies among the smaller towns, you must know its merits. They are
proclaimed along the fences and up the telegraph poles. Drinking-troughs
speak its virtues. Horses thrive on Blat's Food. They neigh for it. A
flashing lithograph is set by way of testament wherever traffic turns or
lingers. Do you not recall the picture? A great red horse rears himself
on his hind legs. His forward hoofs are extended. He is about to trample
someone under foot. His nostrils are wide. He is unduly excited. It cannot
be food, it must be drink that stirs him. He is a fearful spectacle.

There was such a picture on the wall of the stable.

"Have you any horses," I asked nervously, jerking my thumb toward the wall,
"any horses that have been fed on just ordinary food? Some that are a
little tired?"

For I remembered how Mr. Winkle once engaged horses to take the
Pickwickians out to Manor Farm and what mishaps befell them on the way.

"'He don't shy, does he?' inquired Mr. Pickwick.

"'Shy, sir?--He wouldn't shy if he was to meet a vagginload of monkeys with
their tails burnt off.'"

But how Mr. Pickwick dropped his whip, how Mr. Winkle got off his tall
horse to pick it up, how he tried in vain to remount while his horse went
round and round, how they were all spilt out upon the bridge and how
finally they walked to Manor Farm--these things are known to everybody with
an inch of reading.

"'How far is it to Dingley Dell?' they asked.

"'Better er seven mile.'

"'Is it a good road?'

"'No, t'ant.'...

"The depressed Pickwickians turned moodily away, with the tall quadruped,
for which they all felt the most unmitigated disgust, following slowly at
their heels."

"Have you any horses," I repeated, "that have not been fed on Blat's
Food--horses that are, so to speak, on a diet?"

In the farthest stalls, hidden from the sunlight and the invigorating
infection of the day, two beasts were found with sunken chests and hollow
eyes, who took us safely to our destination on their hands and knees.

As you may suspect, I do not enjoy riding. There is, it is true, one saddle
horse in North Carolina that fears me. If time still spares him, that horse
I could ride with content. But I would rather trust myself on the top of a
wobbly step-ladder than up the sides of most horses. I am not quite of a
mind, however, with Samuel Richardson who owned a hobby-horse and rode on
his hearth-rug in the intervals of writing "Pamela." It is likely that when
he had rescued her from an adventure of more than usual danger--perhaps her
villainous master has been concealed in her closet--perhaps he has been
hiding beneath her bed--it is likely, having brought her safely off, the
author locked her in the buttery against a fresh attack. Then he felt, good
man, in need of exercise. So while he waits for tea and muffins, he leaps
upon his rocking-horse and prances off. As for the hobby-horse itself, I
have not heard whether it was of the usual nursery type, or whether it was
built in the likeness of the leather camels of a German steamship.

I need hardly say that these confessions of my cowardice are for your ear
alone. They must not get abroad to smirch me. If on a country walk I have
taken to my heels, you must not twit me with poltroonery. If you charge me
with such faint-heartedness while other persons are present, I'll deny it
flat. When I sit in the company of ladies at dinner, I dissemble my true
nature, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat.
If then, you taunt me, for want of a better escape, I shall turn it to a
jest. I shall engage the table flippantly: Hear how preposterously the
fellow talks!--he jests to satisfy a grudge. In appearance I am whole as
the marble, founded as a rock.

But really some of us cowards are diverting persons. The lady who directed
me against the cow is a most delightful woman with whom I hope I shall
again sit at dinner. A witty lady of my acquaintance shivers when a
cat walks in the room. A man with whom I pass the time pleasantly and
profitably, although he will not admit a fear of ghosts, still will not
sleep in an empty house because of possible noises. I would rather spend a
Saturday evening in the company of the cowardly Falstaff than of the bold
Hotspur. If it were not for sack, villainous sack, and a few spots upon his
front, you would go far to find a better companion than the fat old Knight.
Bob Acres was not much for valor and he made an ass of himself when he went
to fight a duel, yet one could have sat agreeably at mutton with him.

But these things are slight. It matters little whether or not one can mount
a ladder comfortably. Now that motors have come in, horses stand remotely
in our lives. Nor is it of great moment whether or not we fear to be out of
fashion--whether we halt in the wearing of a wrong-shaped hat, or glance
fearfully around when we choose from a line of forks. Superstitions rest
mostly on the surface and are not deadly in themselves. A man can be true
of heart even if he will not sit thirteen at table. But there is a kind
of fear that is disastrous to them that have it. It is the fear of the
material universe in all its manifestations. There are persons, stout both
of chest and limb, who fear drafts and wet feet. A man who is an elephant
of valor and who has been feeling this long while a gentle contempt for
such as myself, will cry out if a soft breeze strikes against his neck. If
a foot slips to the gutter and becomes wet, he will dose himself. Achilles
did not more carefully nurse his heel. For him the lofty dome of air is
packed with malignant germs. The round world is bottled with contagion. A
strong man who, in his time, might have slain the Sofi, is as fearful of
his health as though the plague were up the street. Calamities beset him.
The slightest sniffling in his nose is the trumpet for a deep disorder.
Existence is but a moving hazard. Life for him, poor fellow, is but a room
with a window on the night and a storm beating on the casement. God knows,
it is better to grow giddy on a ladder than to think that this majestic
earth is such an universal pestilence.




The Asperities of the Early British Reviewers


Book reviewers nowadays direct their attention, for the most part, to the
worthy books and they habitually neglect those that seem beneath their
regard. On a rare occasion they assail an unprofitable book, but even this
is often but a bit of practice. They swish a bludgeon to try their hand.
They only take their anger, as it were, upon an outing, lest with too
close housing it grow pallid and shrink in girth. Or maybe they indulge
themselves in humor. Perhaps they think that their pages grow dull and that
ridicule will restore the balance. They throw it in like a drunken porter
to relieve a solemn scene. I fancy that editors of this baser sort keep on
their shelves one or two volumes for their readers' sport and mirth. I read
recently a review of an historical romance--a last faltering descendant of
the race--whose author in an endeavor to restore the past, had made too
free a use of obsolete words. With what playfulness was he held up to
scorn! Mary come up, sweet chuck! How his quaint phrasing was turned
against him! What a merry fellow it is who writes, how sharp and caustic!
There's pepper on his mood.

But generally, it is said, book reviews are too flattering. Professor
Bliss Perry, being of this opinion, offered some time ago a statement
that "Magazine writing about current books is for the most part bland,
complaisant, pulpy.... The Pedagogue no longer gets a chance at the gifted
young rascal who needs, first and foremost, a premonitory whipping; the
youthful genius simply stays away from school and carries his unwhipped
talents into the market place." At a somewhat different angle of the same
opinion, Dr. Crothers suggests in an essay that instead of being directed
to the best books, we need to be warned from the worst. He proposes to set
up a list of the Hundred Worst Books. For is it not better, he asks, to put
a lighthouse on a reef than in the channel? The open sea does not need a
bell-buoy to sound its depth.

On these hints I have read some of the book criticisms of days past to
learn whether they too were pulpy--whether our present silken criticism
always wore its gloves and perfumed itself, or whether it has fallen to
this smiling senility from a sterner youth. Although I am usually a rusty
student, yet by diligence I have sought to mend my knowledge that I might
lay it out before you. Lately, therefore, if you had come within our Public
Library, you would have found me in one of these attempts. Here I went,
scrimping the other business of the day in order that I might be at my
studies before the rush set in up town. Mine was the alcove farthest from
the door, where are the mustier volumes that fit a bookish student. So if
your quest was the lighter books--such verse and novels as present fame
attests--you did not find me. I was hooped and bowed around the corner. I
am no real scholar, but I study on a spurt. For a whole week together I may
read old plays until their jigging style infects my own. I have set myself
against the lofty histories, although I tire upon their lower slopes and
have not yet persisted to their upper and windier ridges. I have, also, a
pretty knowledge of the Queen Anne wits and feel that I must have dogged
and spied upon them while they were yet alive. But in general, although
I am curious in the earlier chapters of learning, I lag in the inner
windings. However, for a fortnight I have sat piled about with old reviews,
whose leather rots and smells, in order that I might study the fading
criticisms of the past.

Until rather near the end of the eighteenth century, those who made their
living in England by writing were chiefly publishers' hacks, fellows of
the Dunciad sucking their quills in garrets and selling their labor for a
crust, for the reading public was too small to support them. Or they
found a patron and gave him a sugared sonnet for a pittance, or strained
themselves to the length of an Ode for a berth in his household. Or
frequently they supported a political party and received a place in the
Red Tape Office. But even in politics, on account of the smallness of the
reading public and the politicians' indifference to its approval, their
services were of slight account. Too often a political office was granted
from a pocket borough in which a restricted electorate could be bought at a
trifling expense. To gain support inside the House of Commons was enough.
The greater public outside could be ignored. This attitude changed with
the coming of the French Revolution. Here was a new force unrealized
before--that of a crowd which, being unrepresented and with a real
grievance, could, when it liked, take a club and go after what it wanted.
For the first time in many years in England--such were the whiffs of
liberty across the Channel--the power of an unrepresented public came to be
known. It was not that the English crowd had as yet taken the club in its
hands, but there were new thoughts abroad in the world, and there was the
possibility to be regarded. To influence this larger public, therefore, men
who could write came little by little into a larger demand. And as
writers were comparatively scarce, all kinds--whether they wrote poems or
prose--were pressed into service. It is significant, too, that it was in
the decades subjected to the first influence of the French Revolution that
the English daily paper took its start as an agent to influence public
opinion.

It was therefore rather more than one hundred years ago that writers came
to a better prosperity. They came out of their garrets, took rooms on the
second floor, polished their brasses and became Persons. I can fancy that a
writer after spending a morning in the composition of a political article
on the whisper of a Cabinet Minister, wrote a sonnet after lunch, and
a book review before dinner. Let us see in what mood they took their
advancement! Let us examine their temper--but in book reviewing only, for
that alone concerns us! In doing this, we have the advantage of knowing the
final estimate of the books they judged. Like the witch, we have looked
into the seeds of time and we know "which grain will grow and which will
not."

In 1802, when the Edinburgh Review (which was the first of its line to
acquire distinction) came into being, the passion of the times found voice
in politics. Both Whigs and Tories had been alarmed by the excesses of the
French Revolution; both feared that England was drifting the way of France;
each had a remedy, but opposed and violently maintained. The Tories put the
blame of the Revolution on the compromises of Louis XVI, and accordingly
they were hostile to any political change. The Whigs, on the other
hand, saw the rottenness of England as a cause that would incite her to
revolution also, and they advocated reform while yet there was time. The
general fear of a revolution gave the government of England to the Tories,
and kept them in power for several decades. And England was ripe for
trouble. The government was but nominally representative. No Catholic,
Jew, Dissenter or poor man had a vote or could hold a seat in Parliament.
Industrially and economically the country was in the condition of France
in the year of Arthur Young's journey. The poverty was abject, the relief
futile and the hatred of the poor for the rich was inflammatory.
George III, slipping into feebleness and insanity, yet jealous of his
unconstitutional power, was a vacillating despot, quarrelling with his
Commons and his Ministers. Lord Eldon as Chancellor, but with as nearly the
control of a Premier as the King would allow, was the staunch upholder of
all things that have since been disproved and discarded. Bagehot said of
him that "he believed in everything which it is impossible to believe in."
France and Napoleon threatened across the narrow channel. England still
growled at the loss of her American colonies. It was as yet the England
of the old regime. The great reforms were to come thirty years later--the
Catholic Emancipation, the abolishment of slavery in the colonies, the
suppression of the pocket boroughs, the gross bribery of elections, the
cleaning of the poor laws and the courts of justice.

It was in this dark hour of English history that the writers polished their
brasses and set up as Persons. And if the leading articles that they wrote
of mornings stung and snapped with venom, it is natural that the book
reviews on which they spent their afternoons had also some vinegar in them,
especially if they concerned books written by those of the opposition. And
other writers, even if they had no political connection, borrowed their
manners from those who had. It was the animosities of party politics that
set the general tone. Billingsgate that had grown along the wharves of the
lower river, was found to be of service in Parliament and gave a spice and
sparkle even to a book review. Presently a large part of literary England
wore the tags of political preference. Writers were often as clearly
distinguished as were the ladies in the earlier day, when Addison wrote his
paper on party patches. There were seats of Moral Philosophy to be handed
out, under-secretaryships, consular appointments. It is not enough to say
that Francis Jeffrey was a reviewer, he was as well a Whig and was running
a Review that was Whig from the front cover to the back. Leigh Hunt was not
merely a poet, for he was also a radical, and therefore in the opinions of
Tories, a believer in immorality and indecency. No matter how innocent
a title might appear, it was held in suspicion, on the chance that it
assailed the Ministry or endangered the purity of England. William Gifford
was more than merely the editor of the Quarterly Review, for he was as well
a Tory editor whose duty it was to pry into Whiggish roguery. Lockhart and
Wilson, who wrote in Blackwood's, were Tories tooth and nail, biting and
scratching for party. Nowadays, literature, having found the public to be
its most profitable patron, works hard and even abjectly for its favor.
Although there are defects in the arrangement, it must be confessed that
the divorce of literature from politics contributes to the general peace of
the household.

The Edinburgh Review was founded in 1802, the Quarterly Review in 1809,
Blackwood's Magazine in 1817. These three won distinction among others of
less importance, and from them only I quote. In 1802, when Tory rule was
strongest and Lord Eldon flourished, there was living in Edinburgh a group
of young men who were for the most part briefless barristers. Their case
was worse because they were Whigs. Few cases came their way and no offices.
These young men were Francis Jeffrey, Francis Horner, Henry Brougham, and
there was also Sydney Smith who had just come to Edinburgh from an English
country parish. The eldest was thirty-one, the youngest twenty-three.
Although all of them had brilliant lives before them, not one of them had
made as yet more than a step toward his accomplishment. Sydney Smith had
been but lately an obscure curate, buried in the middle of Salisbury Plain,
away from all contact with the world. Francis Jeffrey had been a hack
writer in London, had studied medicine, had sought unsuccessfully a
government position in India, had written poor sonnets, and was now
lounging with but a scanty occupation in the halls of the law courts.
Francis Horner had just come to the Scottish bar straight from his studies.
Henry Brougham, who in days to come was to be Lord Chancellor of England
and to whose skill in debate the passing of the Great Reform bill of 1832
is partly due, is also just admitted to the practice of the law.

The founding of the Review was casual. These men were accustomed to meet of
an evening for general discussion and speculation. It happened one night as
they sat together--the place was a garret if legend is to be believed--that
Sydney Smith lamented that their discussions came to nothing, for they were
all Whigs, all converted to the cause; whereas if they could only bring
their opinions to the outside public they could stir opinion. From so
slight a root the Review sprouted. Sydney Smith was made editor and kept
the position until after the appearance of the first number, when Jeffrey
succeeded him. The Review became immediately a power, appearing quarterly
and striking its blows anonymously against a sluggish government, lashing
the Tory writers, and taking its part, which is of greater consequence, in
the promulgation of the Whig reforms which were to ripen in thirty years
and convert the old into modern England. In the destruction of outworn
things, it was, as it were, a magazine of Whig explosives.

The Quarterly Review was the next to come and it was Tory. John Murray, the
London publisher, had been the English distributor of the Edinburgh Review.
In 1809, two considerations moved him to found in London a review to rival
the Scotch periodical. First the Tory party was being hard hit by the
Edinburgh Review and there was need of defense and retaliation. In the
second place, John Murray saw that if his publishing house was to flourish,
it must provide this new form of literature that had become so popular.
For the very shortness of the essays and articles, in which extensive
conditions were summarized for quick digestion, had met with English
approval as well as Scotch. People had become accustomed, says Bagehot, of
taking "their literature in morsels, as they take sandwiches on a journey."
Murray appealed to George Canning, then in office, for assistance and was
introduced to William Gifford as a man capable of the undertaking, who
would also meet the favor of the government party. The rise of the
Quarterly Review was not brilliant. It did not fill the craving for
novelty, inasmuch as the Edinburgh was already in the field. Furthermore,
there is not the opportunity in defense for as conspicuous gallantry as in
offensive warfare.

It was eight years before another enduring review was started. William
Blackwood of Edinburgh had grown like Murray from a bookseller to a
publisher, and he, too, looked for a means of increasing his prestige. He
had launched a review the year previously, in 1816, but it had foundered
when it was scarcely off the ways. His second attempt he was determined
must be successful. His new editors were John G. Lockhart and John Wilson,
and the new policy, although nominally Tory, was first and last the
magazine's notoriety. It hawked its wares into public notice by sensational
articles and personal vilification. Wilson was thirty-two and Lockhart
twenty-three, yet they were as mischievous as boys. In their pages is found
the most abominable raving that has ever passed for literary criticism.
They did not need any party hatred to fire them. William Blackwood
welcomed any abuse that took his magazine out of "the calm of respectable
mediocrity." Anything that stung or startled was welcome to a place in its
pages.

So Blackwood's was published and Edinburgh city, we may be sure, set up a
roar of delight and anger. Never before had one's friends been so assailed.
Never before had one's enemies been so grilled. How pleasing for a Tory
fireside was the mud bath with which it defiled Coleridge, who was--and you
had always known it--"little better than a rogue." One's Tory dinner was
the more toothsome for the hot abuse of the Chaldee Manuscript. What stout
Tory, indeed, would doze of an evening on such a sheet! There followed
of course cases of libel. The editors even found it safer, after the
publication of the first number, to retire for a time to the country until
the city cooled.

I choose now to turn to the pages of these three reviews and set out before
you samples of their criticisms, in order that you may contrast them
with our own literary judgments. I warn you in fairness that I have been
disposed to choose the worst, yet there are hundreds of other criticisms
but little better. Of the three reviews, Blackwood's was the least
seriously political in its policy, yet its critical vilifications are the
worst. The Edinburgh Review, the most able of the three and the most in
earnest in politics, is the least vituperative. With this introduction, let
us shake the pepperpot and lay out the strong vinegar of our feast!

In the judgment of the Edinburgh Review, Tom Moore, who had just published
his "Odes and Epistles" but had not yet begun his Irish melodies, is a man
who "with some brilliancy of fancy, and some show of classical erudition
... may boast, if the boast can please him, of being the most licentious of
modern versifiers, and the most poetical of those who, in our times, have
devoted their talents to the propagation of immorality. We regard his book,
indeed, as a public nuisance.... He sits down to ransact the impure places
of his memory for inflammatory images and expressions, and commits them
laboriously in writing, for the purpose of insinuating pollution into the
minds of unknown and unsuspecting readers."

Francis Jeffrey wrote this, and Moore challenged him to fight. The police
interfered, and as Jeffrey put it, "the affair ended amicably. We have
since breakfasted together very lovingly. He has expressed penitence for
what he has written and declared that he will never again apply any little
talents he may possess to such purpose: and I have said that I shall be
happy to praise him whenever I find that he has abjured these objectionable
topics." It was Sydney Smith who said of Jeffrey he would "damn the solar
system--bad light--planets too distant--pestered with comets. Feeble
contrivance--could make a better with great ease."

Jeffrey reviewed Wordsworth and found in the "Lyrical Ballads"
"vulgarity, affectation and silliness." He is alarmed, moreover, lest
his "childishness, conceit and affectation" spread to other authors. He
proposes a poem to be called "Elegiac Stanzas to a Sucking Pig," and of
"Alice Fell" he writes that "if the publishing of such trash as this be
not felt as an insult on the public taste, we are afraid it cannot be
insulted." When the "White Doe of Rylstone" was published--no prime
favorite, I confess, of my own--Jeffrey wrote that it had the merit of
being the very worst poem he ever saw imprinted in a quarto volume. "It
seems to us," he wrote, "to consist of a happy union of all the faults,
without any of the beauties, which belong to his school of poetry. It is
just such a work, in short, as some wicked enemy of that, school might be
supposed to have devised, on purpose to make it ridiculous."

Lord Byron, on the publication of an early volume, is counselled "that he
do forthwith abandon poetry ... the mere rhyming of the final syllable,
even when accompanied by the presence of a certain number of feet ... is
not the whole art of poetry. We would entreat him to believe," continued
the reviewer, "that a certain portion of liveliness, somewhat of fancy, is
necessary to constitute a poem; and that a poem in the present day, to
be read, must contain at least one thought...." It was this attack that
brought forth Byron's "English Bards and Scotch Reviewers."

As long as Jeffrey hoped to enlist Southey to write for the Edinburgh
Review, he treated him with some favor. But Southey took up with the
Quarterly. "The Laureate," says the Edinburgh presently, "has now been
out of song for a long time: But we had comforted ourselves with the
supposition that he was only growing fat and lazy.... The strain, however,
of this publication, and indeed of some that went before it, makes us
apprehensive that a worse thing has befallen him ... that the worthy
inditer of epics is falling gently into dotage."

Now for the Quarterly Review, if by chance it can show an equal spleen!

There lived in the early days of the nineteenth century a woman by the name
of Lady Morgan, who was the author of several novels and books of travel.
Although her record in intelligence and morals is good, John Croker,
who regularly reviewed her books, accuses her works of licentiousness,
profligacy, irreverence, blasphemy, libertinism, disloyalty and atheism.
There are twenty-six pages of this in one review only, and any paragraph
would be worth the quoting for its ferocity. After this attack it was
Macaulay who said he hated Croker like "cold boiled veal."

The Quarterly reviewed Keats' "Endymion," although the writer naively
states at the outset that he has not read the poem. "Not that we have been
wanting in our duty," he writes, "far from it--indeed, we have made efforts
almost as superhuman as the story itself appears to be, to get through it;
but with the fullest stretch of our perseverance we are forced to confess
that we have not been able to struggle beyond the first of the four
books...." Finally he questions whether Keats is the author's name, for
he doubts "that any man in his senses would put his real name to such a
rhapsody."

Leigh Hunt's "Rimini" the Quarterly finds to be an "ungrammatical,
unauthorized, chaotic jargon, such as we believe was never before spoken,
much less written.... We never," concludes the reviewer, "in so few lines
saw so many clear marks of the vulgar impatience of a low man, conscious
and ashamed of his wretched vanity, and labouring, with coarse flippancy,
to scramble over the bounds of birth and education, and fidget himself into
the stout-heartedness of being familiar with a Lord." In a later review,
Hunt is a propounder of atheism. "Henceforth," says the reviewer, "... he
may slander a few more eminent characters, he may go on to deride venerable
and holy institutions, he may stir up more discontent and sedition, but he
will have no peace of mind within ... he will live and die unhonoured
in his own generation, and, for his own sake it is to be hoped, moulder
unknown in those which are to follow."

Hazlitt belongs to a "class of men by whom literature is more than at any
period disgraced." His style is suited for washerwomen, a "class of
females with whom ... he and his friend Mr. Hunt particularly delight to
associate."

Shelley, writes the Quarterly, "is one of that industrious knot of authors,
the tendency of whose works we have in our late Numbers exposed to the
caution of our readers ... for with perfect deliberation and the steadiest
perseverance he perverts all the gifts of his nature, and does all the
injury, both public and private, which his faculties enable him to
perpetrate." His "poetry is in general a mere jumble of words and
heterogeneous ideas." "The Cloud" is "simple nonsense." "Prometheus
Unbound" is a "great storehouse of the obscure and unintelligible." In the
"Sensitive Plant" there is "no meaning." And for Shelley himself, he is
guilty of a great many terrible things, including verbiage, impiety,
immorality and absurdity.

Of Blackwood's Magazine the special victims were Keats and Hunt and
Coleridge. "Mr. Coleridge," says the reviewer, "... seems to believe that
every tongue is wagging in his praise--that every ear is open to imbibe the
oracular breathings of his inspiration ... no sound is so sweet to him as
that of his own voice ... he seems to consider the mighty universe itself
as nothing better than a mirror in which, with a grinning and idiot
self-complacency, he may contemplate the physiognomy of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge.... Yet insignificant as he assuredly is, he cannot put pen to
paper without a feeling that millions of eyes are fixed upon him...."

Leigh Hunt, says Blackwood, "is a man of extravagant pretensions ...
exquisitely bad taste and extremely vulgar modes of thinking." His
"Rimini" "is so wretchedly written that one feels disgust at its pretense,
affectation and gaudiness, ignorance, vulgarity, irreverence, quackery,
glittering and rancid obscenities."

Blackwood's wrote of the "calm, settled, imperturbable, drivelling idiocy
of Endymion," and elsewhere of Keats' "prurient and vulgar lines, evidently
meant for some young lady east of Temple Bar.... It is a better and a wiser
thing," it commented, "to be a starved apothecary than a starved poet; so
back to the shop, Mr. John, back to 'plasters, pills and ointment
boxes.'" And even when Shelley wrote his "Adonais" on the death of Keats,
Blackwood's met it with a contemptible parody:

"Weep for my Tom cat! all ye Tabbies weep!"

Perhaps I have quoted enough. This is the parentage of our silken and
flattering criticism.

The pages of these old reviews rest yellow on the shelves. From them there
comes a smell of rotting leather, as though the infection spreads. The hour
grows late. Like the ghost of the elder Hamlet, I detect the morning to be
near.




The Pursuit of Fire


Reader, if by chance you have the habit of writing--whether they be sermons
to hurl across your pews, or sonnets in the Spring--doubtless you have
moments when you sit at your desk bare of thoughts. Mother Hubbard's
cupboard when she went to seek the bone was not more empty. In such plight
you chew your pencil as though it were stuff to feed your brain. Or if you
are of delicate taste, you fall upon your fingers. Or in the hope that
exercise will stir your wits, you pace up and down the room and press your
nose upon the window if perhaps the grocer's boy shall rouse you. Some
persons draw pictures on their pads or put pot-hooks on their letters--for
talent varies--or they roughen up their hair. I knew one gifted fellow
whose shoes presently would cramp him until he kicked them off, when at
once the juices of his intellect would flow. Genius, I am told, sometimes
locks its door and, if unrestrained, peels its outer wrappings. Or, in your
poverty, you run through the pages of a favorite volume, with a notebook
for a sly theft to start you off. In what dejection you have fallen! It is
best that you put on your hat and take your stupid self abroad.

Or maybe you think that your creative fire will blaze, if instead of
throwing in your wet raw thoughts, you feed it a few seasoned bits. You
open, therefore, the drawer of your desk where you keep your rejected and
broken fragments--for your past has not been prosperous--hopeful against
experience that you can recast one of these to your present mood. This
is mournful business. Certain paragraphs that came from you hot are now
patched and shivery. Their finer meaning has run out between the lines as
though these spaces were sluices for the proper drainage of the page. You
had best put on your hat. You will get no comfort from these stale papers.

One evening lately, being in this plight, I spread out before me certain
odds and ends. I had dug deeper than usual in the drawer and had brought up
a yellow stratum of a considerable age. I was poring upon these papers and
was wondering whether I could fit them to a newer measure, when I heard a
slight noise behind me. I glanced around and saw that a man had entered the
room and was now seated in a chair before the fire. In the common nature
of things this should have been startling, for the hour was late--twelve
o'clock had struck across the way--and I had thought that I was quite
alone. But there was something so friendly and easy in his attitude--he
was a young man, little more than a lanky boy--that instead of being
frightened, I swung calmly around for a better look. He sat with his legs
stretched before him and with his chin resting in his hand, as though in
thought. By the light that fell on him from the fire, I saw that he wore a
brown checked suit and that he was clean and respectable in appearance. His
face was in shadow.

"Good evening," I said, "you startled me."

"I am sorry," he replied. "I beg your pardon. I was going by and I saw your
light. I wished to make your acquaintance. But I saw at once that I was
intruding, so I sat here. You were quite absorbed. Would you mind if I
mended the fire?"

Without waiting for an answer, he took the poker and dealt the logs several
blows. It didn't greatly help the flame, but he poked with such enjoyment
that I smiled. I have myself rather a liking for stirring a fire. He set
another log in place. Then he drew from his pocket a handful of dried
orange peel. "I love to see it burn," he said. "It crackles and spits." He
ranged the peel upon the log where the flame would get it, and then settled
himself in the big chair.

"Perhaps you smoke?" I asked, pushing toward him a box of cigarettes.

He smiled. "I thought that you would know my habits. I don't smoke."

"So you were going by and came up to see me?" I asked.

"Yes. I was not sure that I would know you. You are a little older than I
thought, a little--stouter, but dear me, how you have lost your hair! But
you have quite forgotten me."

"My dear boy," I said, "you have the advantage of me. Where have I seen
you? There is something familiar about you and I am sure that I have seen
that brown suit before."

"We have never really known each other," the boy replied. "We met once, but
only for an instant. But I have thought of you since that meeting a great
many times. I lay this afternoon on a hilltop and wondered what you would
be like. But I hoped that sometimes you would think of me. Perhaps you have
forgotten that I used to collect railway maps and time-tables."

"Did you?" I replied. "So did I when I was a little younger than you are.
Perhaps if I might see your face, I would know you."

"It's nothing for show," he replied, and he kept it still in shadow. "Would
you mind," he said at length, "if I ate an apple?" He took one from his
pocket and broke it in his hands. "You eat half," he said.

I accepted the part he offered me. "Perhaps you would like a knife and
plate," I said. "I can find them in the pantry."

"Not for me," he replied. "I prefer to eat mine this way." He took an
enveloping bite.

"I myself care nothing for plates," I said. We ate in silence. Presently:
"You have my habit," I said, "of eating everything, skin, seeds and all."

"Everything but the stem," he replied.

By this time the orange peel was hissing and exploding.

"You are an odd boy," I said. "I used to put orange peel away to dry in
order to burn it. We seem to be as like as two peas."

"I wonder," he said, "if that is so." He turned in his chair and faced me,
although his face was still in shadow. "Doubtless, we are far different in
many things. Do you swallow grape seeds?"

"Hardly!" I cried. "I spit them out."

"I am glad of that." He paused. "It was a breezy hilltop where I lay. I
thought of you all afternoon. You are famous, of course?"

"Dear me, no!"

"Oh, I'm so sorry. I had hoped you might be. I had counted on it. It is
very disappointing. I was thinking about that as I lay on the hill. But
aren't you just on the point of doing something that will make you famous?"

"By no means."

"Dear me, I am so sorry. Do you happen to be married?"

"Yes."

"And would you mind telling me her name?"

I obliged him.

"I don't remember to have heard of her. I didn't think of that name once
as I lay upon the hill. Things don't turn out as one might expect. Now, I
would have thought--but it's no matter."

For a moment or so he was lost in thought, and then he spoke again: "You
were writing when I came into the room?"

"Nothing important."

The boy ran his fingers in his hair and threw out his arms impatiently.
"That's what I would like to do. I am in college, and I try for one of the
papers. But my stuff comes back. But this summer in the vacation, I am
working in an office. I run errands and when there is nothing else to do, I
study a big invoice book, so as to get the names of things that are bought.
There is a racket of drays and wagons outside the windows, and along in
the middle of the afternoon I get tired and thick in my head. But I write
Saturday afternoons and Sunday mornings."

The boy stopped and fixed his eyes on me. "I don't suppose that you happen
to be a poet?"

"Not at all," I replied. "But perhaps you are one. Tell me about it!"

The boy took a turn at the fire with the poker, but it was chiefly in
embarrassment. Presently he returned to his chair. He stretched his long
arms upward above his head.

"No, I'm not," he said. "And yet sometimes I think that I have a kind of
poetry in me. Only I can't get it into words. I lay thinking about that,
too, on the hillside. There was a wind above my head, and I thought that I
could almost put words to the tune. But I have never written a single poem.
Yet, goodness me, what thoughts I have! But they aren't real thoughts--what
you would regularly call thoughts. Things go racing and tingling in my
head, but I can never get them down. They are just feelings."

As he spoke, the boy gazed intently through the chimney bricks out into
another world. The fireplace was its portal and he seemed to wait for the
fires to cool before entering into its possession. It was several moments
before he spoke again.

"I don't want you to think me ridiculous, but so few understand. If only I
could master the tools! Perhaps my thoughts are old, but they come to me
with such freshness and they are so unexpected. Could I only solve the
frets and spaces inside me here, I could play what tune I chose. But my
feelings are cold and stale before I can get them into thoughts. I have no
doubt, however, that they are just as real as those other feelings that in
time, after much scratching, get into final form and become poetry. I
know of course that a man's reach should exceed his grasp--it's hackneyed
enough--but just for once I would like to pull down something when I have
been up on tiptoe for a while.

"Sometimes I get an impression of pity--a glance up a dark hallway--an old
woman with a shawl upon her head--a white face at a window--a blind fiddler
in the street--but the impression is gone in a moment. Or a touch of beauty
gets me. It may be nothing but a street organ in the spring. Perhaps you
like street organs, too?"

"I do, indeed!" I cried. "There was one today outside my window and my feet
kept wiggling to it."

The boy clapped his hands. "I knew that you would be like that. I hoped for
it on the hill. As for me, when I hear one, I'm so glad that I could cry
out. In its lilt there is the rhythm of life. It moves me more than a
hillside with its earliest flowers. Am I absurd? It is equal to the pipe of
birds, to shallow waters and the sound of wind to stir me to thoughts of
April. Today as I came downtown, I saw several merry fellows dancing on
the curb. There are tunes, too, upon the piano that send me off. I play a
little myself. I see you have a piano. Do you still play?"

"A little, rather sadly," I replied.

"That's too bad, but perhaps you sing?"

"Even worse."

"Dear me, that's too bad. I have rather a voice myself. Well, as I was
saying, when I hear those tunes, I curl up with the smoke and blow forth
from the chimney. If I walk upon the street when the wind is up, and see a
light fleece of smoke coming from a chimney top, I think that down below
someone is listening to music that he likes, and that his thoughts ride
upon the night, like those white streamers of smoke. And then I think of
castles and mountains and high places and the sounds of storm. Or in fancy
I see a tower that tapers to the moon with a silver gleam upon it."

The strange boy lay back and laughed. "Musicians think that they are the
only ones that can hear the finer sounds. If one of us common fellows cocks
his ear, they think that only the coarser thumps get inside. And artists
think that they alone know the glory of color. I was thinking of that, this
afternoon. And yet I have walked under the blue sky. I have seen twilights
that these men of paint would botch on canvas. But both musicians and
artists have a vision that is greater than their product. The soul of a man
can hardly be recorded in black and white keys. Nor can a little pigment
which you rub upon your thumb be the measure of an artist. So I suppose
that is the way also with poets. It is not to be expected that they can
express themselves fully in words that they have borrowed from the kitchen.
When their genius flames up, it is only the lesser sparks that fall upon
their writing pads. It consoles me that a man should be greater than his
achievement. I who have done so little would otherwise be so forlorn."

"It's odd," I said, when he had fallen into silence, "that I used to feel
exactly as you do. It stirs an old recollection. If I am not mistaken, I
once wrote a paper on the subject."

The boy smiled dreamily. "But if small persons like myself," he began, "can
have such frenzies, how must it be with those greater persons who have
amazed the world? I have wondered in what kind of exaltation Shakespeare
wrote his storm in 'Lear.' There must have been a first conception greater
even than his accomplishment. Did he look from his windows at a winter
tempest and see miserable old men and women running hard for shelter? Did
a flash of lightning bare his soul to the misery, the betrayal and the
madness of the world? His supreme moment was not when he flung the
completed manuscript aside, or when he heard the actors mouth his lines,
but in the flash and throb of creation--in the moment when he knew that he
had the power in him to write 'Lear.' What we read is the cold forging,
wonderful and enduring, but not to be compared to the producing furnace."

The boy had spoken so fast that he was out of breath.

"Hold a bit!" I cried. "What you have said sounds familiar. Where could I
have heard it before?"

There was something almost like a sneer on the boy's face. "What a memory
you have! And perhaps you recall this brown suit, too. It's ugly enough to
be remembered. Now please let me finish what came to me this afternoon on
the hill! Prometheus," he continued, "scaled the heavens and brought back
fire to mortals. And he, as the story goes, clutched at a lightning bolt
and caught but a spark. And even that, glorious. Mankind properly accredits
him with a marvellous achievement. It is for this reason that I comfort
myself although I have not yet written a single line of verse."

"My dear fellow," I said, "please tell me where I have read something like
what you have spoken?"

The boy's answer was irrelevant. "You first tell me what you did with a
brown checked suit you once owned."

"I never owned but one brown suit," I replied, "and that was when I was
still in college. I think that I gave it away before it was worn out."

The boy once more clapped his hands. "Oh, I knew it, I knew it. I'll give
mine tomorrow to the man who takes our ashes. Now, won't you please play
the piano for me?"

"Assuredly. Choose your tune!"

He fumbled a bit in the rack and passing some rather good music, he held up
a torn and yellow sheet. "This is what I want," he said.

I had not played it for many years. After a false start or so--for it was
villainously set in four sharps for which I have an aversion--I got through
it. On a second trial I did better.

The boy made no comment. He had sunk down in his chair until he was quite
out of sight. "Well," I said, "what next?"

There was no answer.

I arose from the bench and glanced in his direction. "Hello," I cried,
"what has become of you?"

The chair was empty. I turned on all the lights. He was nowhere in sight. I
shook the hangings. I looked under my desk, for perhaps the lad was hiding
from me in jest. It was unlikely that he could have passed me to gain the
door, but I listened at the sill for any sound upon the stairs. The hall
was silent. I called without response. Somewhat bewildered I came back to
the hearth. Only a few minutes before, as it seemed, there had been a brisk
fire with a row of orange peel upon the upper log. Now all trace of the
peel was gone and the logs had fallen to a white ash.

I was standing perplexed, when I observed that a little pile of papers lay
on the rug just off the end of my desk as by a careless elbow. At least,
I thought, this impolite fellow has forgotten some of his possessions. It
will serve him right if it is poetry that he wrote upon the hilltop.

I picked up the papers. They were yellow and soiled, and writing was
scrawled upon them. At the top was a date--but it was twenty years old.
I turned to the last sheet. At least I could learn the boy's name. To my
amazement, I saw at the bottom in an old but familiar writing, not the
boy's name, but my own.

I gazed at the chimney bricks and their substance seemed to part before my
eyes. I looked into a world beyond--a fabric of moonlight and hilltop and
the hot fret of youth. Perhaps the boy had only been waiting for the fire
upon the hearth to cool to enter this other world of his restless ambition
and desire.

Reader, if by chance you have the habit of writing--let us confine
ourselves now to sonnets and such airy matter as rides upon the
night--doubtless, you sit sometimes at your desk bare of thoughts. The
juices of your intellect are parched and dry. In such plight, I beg you
not to fall upon your fingers or to draw pictures on your sheet. But most
vehemently, and with such emphasis as I possess, I beg you not to rummage
among your rejected and broken fragments in the hope of recasting a
withered thought to a present mood. Rather, before you sour and curdle,
it is good to put on your hat and take your stupid self abroad.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THERE'S PIPPINS AND CHEESE TO COME ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hand-book on cheese making
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hand-book on cheese making

Author: George E. Newell

Release date: May 20, 2023 [eBook #70813]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Michigan Dairyman, 1889

Credits: Bob Taylor, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND-BOOK ON CHEESE MAKING ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  HAND-BOOK

  ——ON——

  CHEESE MAKING,

  ——BY——

  GEO. E. NEWELL.


  PUBLISHED BY
  THE MICHIGAN DAIRYMAN,
  GRAND RAPIDS.




ACKNOWLEDGMENT.


Thanks are due Messrs. Hunter, Walton & Co., of New York; Childs &
Jones, of Utica, and D. H. Burrell & Co., of Little Falls, N. Y., for
some statistical information contained in these pages.

  COPYRIGHT 1889,
  BY
  E. A. STOWE & BRO.

  PRESS OF
  FULLER & STOWE CO.




PREFACE.


This little work on cheese manufacture is inscribed to makers,
dealers and consumers, in the hope that its careful perusal may be
of aid to one and all. The prestige that American cheese holds in
the markets of the world has been threatened from many quarters, but
we who inaugurated the Cheddar system on this side of the Atlantic
are not prepared to succumb to competition, however sharp, or to
prejudice, however strong. American cheese will hold its own as long
as it has a square quality basis to stand upon. We possess the most
natural and privileged dairy regions on earth. Let us utilize to
their fullest extent the great advantages within our grasp. Dairymen
have of late been struck with consternation by the ascendency of
Canadian cheese over the States’ product. The dairy press have been
pounding away at the gruesome situation so vigorously that many
cheese men have been frightened into the belief that Canada has a
corner on gilt-edged quality and fancy quotations that is liable to
continue indefinitely. The writer has no such apprehension, however,
and sees no reason why an American cheese should not always be a
peer of the best. There has been unanimous action all over the
dairy portions of the Dominion to effect the slight advantage they
now hold. If, in a strenuous endeavor to improve the product, our
friends across the border have succeeded and at the same time have
stimulated us to a like movement, then thanks be to them. Legitimate
competition aids all mankind.

As the caption indicates, this treatise is from the pen of a
practical maker, who analyzes cheese manufacture from a standpoint of
practice and experience, and not theory. In elucidating to my readers
the fundamental and collateral fabric of milk manufacture, I write
from the desk of a cheese factory, with milk, utensils and product
under my immediate and daily supervision. In these pages, I shall
discard everything theoretic, and base the whole value of the book
on its practicability. In doing so my constant thought shall be the
elevation and supremacy of American cheese to the highest standard
attainable. To this manual I especially invite the criticism of the
cheese profession in general, trusting that it may be a convenient
book of reliable reference to the experienced and a work of utility
to the novice.

  GEO. E. NEWELL.

LEONARDSVILLE, N. Y.




THE FACTORY BUILDING AND SITE.


The site for a cheese factory should be a well-drained, slightly
elevated location, convenient to a copious and perpetual flow of
water. The size of the building is, of course, to be measured by the
amount of milk to be manufactured therein, but the same internal
arrangement is needed alike in both small and large factories. The
building should rest on a substantial stone foundation, with a free
circulation of air underneath, and a complete system of troughs be
appendent to carry all slops and whey beyond contaminating distance.
It is unnecessary that the building be more than a story and a half
high, unless the upper apartment is required for something besides
curing cheese. The make-room should be ceiled, and the curing-room
plastered. The make-room should be in the front of the building,
with the engine-room on one side of it and the milk delivery window
on the other. The curing-room should be in the back. Cut off all
superfluous space about the building and have just enough room to be
nicely convenient. Put an awning roof over the delivery window, wide
and long enough to cover wagon and team. Set the vats broadside to
the milk scales, with ends towards the outer door. The platform for
the weighing-can and scales should be on a level with the top of the
vats. A small office desk should be hung to the wall near the weigh
can, and close at hand, so that every patron can see them, should
be arranged the cream tubes, and lactometer. Tin utensils can be
hung on pegs in the wall, and a stout, low shelf in one corner will
support rennet and annottoine jars. Have the aisle between the vats
wide enough to permit of easy passage, and at the farther ends of
the vats sink a trough into the floor to carry off the whey. Have
similar troughs under the presses. The floor should be full enough
in the center to gravitate all slop toward the drains. It is useless
to have a factory floor wet all of the time; keep it dry by a system
of neatness. The curing-room should have an outside door, from
which cheese can be loaded. An adjoining lean-to shed, for storing
empty cheese boxes and housing fuel, is also a needed addition to
the building. For a one day milk delivery factory, no ice-house is
required. Build substantially and paint neatly, aiming to have a
model-looking factory.


Beginning of the Cheese Factory System in America.

About the year 1853, a gentleman residing near Rome, Oneida county,
N. Y., Jesse Williams by name, conceived the idea of manufacturing
his neighbors’ milk in common with his own. This is the first known
instance of manufacture in this country by associated dairies,
although the method was previously in vogue in Switzerland. I quote
from an old report: “It required a long time to create the demand
which now exists in England for American cheese, and to Herkimer
county, New York, belongs the credit of creating it and securing the
trade. It was mainly effected by bringing a high degree of skill to
bear upon the manufacture generally, thus producing not only a good
article, but uniformly good, or as near uniform as is possible when
made in different families. Cheese had been sent abroad in small
amounts for many years, but when once by good quality and uniformity
it had secured a firm foothold, the amount exported increased with
astonishing rapidity. By gradual growth it had come to nine million
pounds in 1859, in 1860 it amounted to twenty-three millions, in
1861 to forty millions, and the demand and supply have steadily
increased ever since. It is a noteworthy fact that systematic
attempts to improve the manufacture of cheese began to be made both
in Somersetshire, England, and in Herkimer county, New York, about
the same time; and also, that with no knowledge on the part of either
of the progress made by the other, after lengthened experiments, both
should have adopted substantially the same method; for it is a fact
that the Cheddar and Herkimer methods so closely resemble each other
that the only differences of any consequence are such as necessarily
grow out of the difference of climate. Their process differs from
most methods mainly in two particulars; first, in employing milk
which has attained a proximate degree of acidity, although never
enough to be sensible to the taste, instead of such as is quite
new; and, second, in the separation of the whey from the curd by
causing its contraction and precipitation, instead of depending
mainly on mechanical means. The improvements thus introduced within
a comparatively recent period have resulted in several important
advantages: First, a material reduction of labor; second, the
production of a larger amount and a better quality of cheese from a
given quantity of milk; and, lastly, the cheese made by this method
requires less time for the ripening process, and thus is sooner ready
for the market.


Utensils Necessary to Stock a Factory.

A boiler of moderate capacity, with fittings complete; milk vats with
steam pipes and connections; patent galvanized iron cheese hoops; a
gang press; weigh can with large gate; milk conductor to convey the
lacteal fluid from the weigh can to the cloth strainer over the vat;
common sized scales that will weigh at least 600 pounds; small sized
scales for weighing cheese; two curd knives, one with horizontal
and the other with perpendicular blades; large wheel with crank and
endless rope for hoisting milk; two stone rennet jars of a capacity
of ten gallons each; two thermometers, one for the make and the other
for the curing-room; jar for keeping annottoine; syphon and tin
strainer for drawing whey from the vat; a self-salting curd mill—a
curd mill is now indispensable to a factory, and a self-salting one
is indispensable where only one man is employed; rubber mop, curd
broom and floor broom; milk book for keeping accurate account of all
business transacted in the establishment, including daily receipts
of milk from patrons; a set of glass tubes in a case, for testing
milk as to the amount of cream it contains and comparing its state
of maturity; two water pails and one curd pail; a heavy curd scoop;
two dippers, one of three and the other of six quarts capacity; glass
graduated jar and lactometer for testing milk to locate water—be sure
and purchase a lactometer gauged for trying milk at 80° Fahrenheit,
many being gauged for 60° Fahrenheit, and of little use in hot
weather unless you have ice handy to chill the milk designed for the
test; stencils, case and brush for dating cheese and branding boxes;
tin funnel for conveying whey from the vat to the outside tank; curd
rake for agitating the product when cooking; a cheese tryer; a curd
sink is not now strictly essential, although some makers still prefer
to use one.

In glancing over the above list we will mention some of the articles
that can be supplemented by utensils of a more primitive and cheaper
make. Such a retrograde change is not, however, desirable, although
sometimes in a small factory where the receipts to the manufacturer
are limited, strict economy has to be practiced in order to leave
a margin of profit. With economists of necessity the boiler can
be discarded and an old-fashioned under-heater vat, with a hot
water tank attached, made to do service. I know of dozens of small
factories throughout Central New York who get along admirably with
such apparatus. In the matter of press and hoops you can do better
without the gang press than you can without the patent hoops.
Remember that it is no economy to go back to the primitive hoop that
makes necessary the hand bandaging of every cheese. If obliged to go
without the gang press, get hoops that can be bandaged before the
curd is put in them, so that two cheese can be pressed under one
screw in an old-fashioned press. In such a case wooden followers
would be required. One pair of scales can be got along with at a
pinch, although two pairs would save a great deal of transferring
and extra work. Do not get along with one curd knife—you need both
the horizontal and the perpendicular, in order to cut the raw curd
evenly and economically. A crane can take the place of a large wheel
for hoisting milk if you consider it more convenient. Keep rennet
in nothing but stone jars or vessels and keep at least ten gallons
always prepared ahead. Jugs are often used for annottoine, although
an open jar admits of easy dipping and accurate measurement. Have
your tinner make you a long, narrow gill cup, to which should be
soldered an upright six-inch handle with a shepherd’s crook in the
end. Use the cup for measuring out the coloring; the long handle,
which can be hung by the crook on the inside of the jar, precludes
soiling the hands, clothing and floor with the scarlet dye. A curd
mill of some sort is positively necessary in order to facilitate
good, even stock; do not leave one out of the list of apparati under
any consideration. I prefer a self-salting mill, not only on account
of the ease with which curd can be ground but also for its superior
mechanism in thoroughly mixing the salt into the curd as fast as it
is torn by the teeth. In grinding curd with a common machine, the
torn shreds quickly re-amalgamate into an almost solid mass that
often requires harsh manipulation to separate. Then, again, the salt
being sprinkled by hand over the outer surface of the freshly-torn
curd sears and burns it before it can be worked into the mass. With a
self-salter, the saline condiment is equally distributed through all
parts at the proper limit of acid formation, thus preventing the curd
from packing solidly and making the quality even and fine.




MANUFACTURE OF CHEESE.


COAGULATION OF MILK.

If the milk you have in your vat is mature, or, in other words,
slightly tending toward sour, heat it as rapidly as possible when
preparing for the application of rennet. In the cool extremes of the
season heat milk to 86° Fahrenheit and in warm weather to 85° before
rennet is applied. If the milk is all right as to sweetness, as the
bulk of milk is, heat it up to the desired point gradually, stirring
it gently at frequent intervals with a long-handled dipper. You stir
for the purpose of keeping down the cream and evenly distributing the
warmth that is permeating the lacteal mass. You stir it with great
gentleness and care because milk globules are eggs in miniature, and,
like their large relatives of biped production, they must be handled
with care. If you wish to heat to 85° and have an under-heater vat
or fire flue beneath the milk, withdraw the fire before it has quite
reached that point, as the after warmth will carry it up a degree
or two. Be perfectly precise in all such little points, for on them
hinge big results.

With milk in normal condition as to maturity, standing at a
temperature of 85° in both ends of the vat, and with no cream visible
on the surface, you are ready to take another step in the course
of manufacture. If colored cheese are desired, now apply annottoine
sufficient to give a rich, golden hue. Know exactly by experiment
its strength as a dye, always know the quantity of milk to a pound
and portion out accordingly. Work the coloring into the fluid with
the same gentleness with which you have heretofore manipulated it
while raising the temperature. When the milk is all of one even,
yellow tinge, attesting that the annotto is represented equally in
every part, it is ready for the real inceptor of cheese, rennet.
The tendency of modern cheese making is toward quick coagulation
of milk. The larger infusion of rennet necessary for this purpose
begets cheese that can be quickly cured for a market where they are
expected to be soon consumed. The old rule of coagulation in twenty
minutes is now nearly obsolete, although it will always hold good for
cheese of long keeping qualities. Fall made cheese that are expected
to be consumed during the winter months should be strengthened for
age by coagulation in from fifteen to eighteen minutes. When we are
dealing with the average spring and summer make, trade demands more
perishable stock and we must cater to it. If you do not know the
strength of your rennet and you want the milk to thicken in eight or
nine minutes, as it should do, previously test the lactic juice by
putting a teaspoonful into a tumbler of milk kept warm at 85°. If
the glass of fluid thickens in five minutes, you need one quart of
such rennet juice for every 800 pounds of milk to effect coagulation,
as stated above. If the tested quantity thickens in less or longer
time, a proportionate less or greater amount is required for your
purpose. Measure the rennet extract with exactness, so that there
will be no miss in its proper adjustment to the milk, and then
incorporate it into the vat of lacteal fluid. In infusing it into the
milk structure, manipulate your dipper with the same caution that has
characterized your former attitude toward the fragilely constructed
fluid under your hand. After stirring for five minutes, withdraw the
dipper and let the surface of the milk come to a calm. Then pass
the bottom of the empty dipper lightly over the vat to drive back
any particles of cream that may be struggling to the surface. The
milk will soon begin to roll up in the wake of the tin utensil in
your hand in a rapidly thickening wave. Immediately withdraw the
dipper, for the rennet has accomplished its mission. Turning to your
vat cover, stretch it tightly over the fermenting milk. The cover
mentioned should consist of a strip of canvas cloth or sheeting
running the entire length of the vat and lapping slightly over its
width. The cloth should be tacked to lath or other light wooden
strips the width of the vat, and these supports should be about
two feet apart. When not in use, the cover can be rolled up like
a section of carpeting and is not at all awkward to handle. Place
the cover in a closed form on one end of the vat, and, unrolling it
as fast as you walk, you can stretch it to the other end in half a
minute, thus keeping your milk snug and close. I prefer to use such
a cover every day during the season, and they are indispensable in
spring and fall. Without some such device the crust of the rapidly
forming curd is chilled, retarding the action of the rennet, and
the temperature of the whole mass is perceptibly lowered, which is
not only undesirable but positively detrimental to the natural and
perfect formation of cheese.

In the course of twenty or thirty minutes after coagulation examine
your crude cheese material and see if it is ready to cut up. Thrust
the forefinger into the mass, and if the curd will split cleanly in
front of it, it is ready for the knives. Milk should stand about
forty-five minutes after the infusion of rennet before it is cut, but
if the milk is very mature in quality rennet will act on the caseine
more spontaneously. It may be firm enough to cut before that time;
if, in such a case, the same amount of rennet had previously acted
slowly on a proportionate quantity of milk, you can at once consider
the quick action as a fair warning from nature that you must scald
your curd in haste to keep ahead of the swiftly multiplying acid
germs. As previously stated, as soon as the curd mass will cleave
brittlely over the finger prepare your knives. First pick up the
one with horizontal blade and hold it a second in hot water. This
will warm the steel so that it will not chill the curd. Cut the mass
lengthwise, turning corners deftly without lifting the instrument
once until you are through. Then lay this knife aside for its work
is done. Insert the perpendicular knife also in hot water and with
it cut the curd first crosswise, then lengthwise, then crosswise
again, being sure to lap over the course of each cut. The curd is
now in small cubes that are fast discharging whey from their severed
cellular system. They gravitate toward the bottom of the vat. If the
curd has been cleft by the blades, gently and with great care, the
rising whey has a clear, greenish cast, attesting that it is freed
from most of the albuminous substances of the milk and will render a
good ratio to the patrons.


SCALDING.

If the milk was mature, or too much rennet was incorporated with
perfectly sweet milk, the whey will separate from the solids very
rapidly. In either case it wants an immediate application of heat
after cutting. Curd from fairly good milk, with a proper infusion of
rennet, should stand for a few moments after cutting before heat is
turned on. Never apply heat under any circumstances until the raw
curd has all disappeared beneath the whey’s surface. As soon as the
heat has warmed the bottom of the vat, bare your arms and with the
hands gently lift the new cut mass to the surface. In this lifting
give it a rolling motion, so that the cubes will all fall apart and
exchange positions with one another.

Two dangers now arise and you must be prepared to steer straight
between them. First, as the heat comes surging up from beneath
against the tin bottom of the vat it makes it very hot below and cool
on top. If the raw curd settles but a moment against the hot bottom
it is liable to be blistered and seared over, to the subsequent
detriment of the whole mass. Of course, it needs a slow application
of heat on the start and almost constant agitation, and here comes
danger number two. If you do not stir your curd sufficiently in
heating, the quality of your goods is at stake, and if you do not
stir judiciously, or stir too often and too harshly, your milk ratio
is in jeopardy. By exercising good judgment, care and caution you can
avoid the two extremes and make each danger your willing servant. If
your milk on the start is sweet and pure, allow the heat to go up
slowly until it touches the desired point. If, on the other hand,
it is ripe, old or sour, push the heat with all vigor and scald as
quickly as possible. With milk all right, about three-fourths of
an hour’s time should be consumed in bringing up the heat to the
scalding limit, but if otherwise get it there in fifteen minutes or
half an hour, according to the exigency of the case.

But, to return to the subject of scalding a vat of curd in normal
condition. On the start, using your hands as described, manipulate
it with such care that the tender cubes are not bruised and yet
are kept separate enough so that they will not form into a compact
mass on the warm bottom. All this time the whey is percolating from
the blocks and they are shrinking in size and becoming of tougher
texture. As soon as the curd begins to assume a slightly elastic
consistency begin operations with a rake. If you have an idea that
curd wants to be stirred all of the time through the scalding period,
at once disabuse your mind of it. Such a notion is antediluvian in
its conception and disastrous in its results, but, strange to say,
it is the predominating feature of the know-it-all young maker’s
knowledge. Novices at the business are sure to stir too often and too
violently. This knocks off the yield and also injures the quality of
the cheese. For myself, above all patent devices in the shape of wire
rakes for agitating curd, I prefer a simple wooden hand hay rake. Get
one made of wood throughout and saw off the handle, leaving the stub
about four feet long; this will insure convenient handling. When the
moment arrives in the early cooking departure to use the rake, take
the utensil described and, inserting it teeth up in the whey and curd
midway of the vat at one end, push it gently from you to within two
inches of the farther edge, letting the back of the rake head slide
on the bottom of the vat. Be sure and do not let the teeth and head
of the agitator hit the side of the vat, as curd is pushed before it
which does not want the substance and nutriment crushed out of it
that way. As the rake approaches the side of the vat give it an easy,
undulating, upward swing, ending by a draw of the rake toward you.
This will cause the curd that you have been pushing from you along
the bottom of the vat to boil up with the whey in the wake of the
retreating rake. If the motion has been gone through with easily and
carefully, you will at once see that the curd within the rake’s sweep
has been thoroughly agitated without bruising. After the manoeuvre
described, do not change position but drawing the rake toward you,
with its head scraping the bottom of the vat, produce a gentle
ebullition of curd and whey in the same way as that just manifested.
Step along, repeating the pushing and drawing of the rake until the
farther end of the vat is reached. Then, push the curd with the rake
up on one side and down on the other of the vat, changing ends, as
it were, with the cooking cheese. Once over a vat in this way, if
accomplished properly, thoroughly separates the curd particles and
evens up the heat through the whole mass. Now, let the rake rest
but have the heat go on for a few moments. When the curd begins to
pack slightly (perhaps in five minutes, more or less, according to
the previous maturity of the milk), again stir it up in the manner
described and again let it rest, repeating the periods of agitation
until it is scalded up to the desired temperature. In regard to
the right temperature at which to scald cheese we cannot hope to
give on paper much more than superficial information. Every phase
of cheese making, to be thoroughly understood, requires practical
experience, but hints and pointers on paper are often just what are
needed to help puzzled ones out of awkward dilemmas encountered in
the business. Hence, we shall, in the most clear and logical manner
possible, give the reader our views, derived from experience, on
scalding temperature.


RIGHT TEMPERATURE.

In the spring of the year, hay produced milk is comparatively poor
and thin. When it reaches the manufacturer’s hands it is generally
as sweet as a rose in regard to acid, although not always so in
regard to stable tang. When it has been transformed into curd
it must be scalded high enough to cook it, whether that takes a
temperature of 98°, 100° or 110° Fahrenheit. Don’t think, as some
do, that the curd is cooked when it has reached the temperature
you are using—generally it is not more than half cooked then. We
will say you began making cheese on the first day of April. You are
not an expert at the business and, being anxious to make a good
beginning, feel a trifle nervous over the situation. Keep cool and
bring the temperature of the curd up to 100°. On reaching this heat
immediately cover up the vat with the carpet-like canopy previously
described. Be sure and give it a thorough rake stirring the last
thing on reaching the scalding point. If the make-room is reasonably
warm the canvas roof will keep the whey at a mercurial heat of 100°
for a long while. After a few minutes examine the curd and see how
it is progressing. Stir it up occasionally—once in fifteen minutes
or so is sufficient—and after it has stood an hour and a half at
100°, if it does not squeak sharply between the teeth when chewed or
immediately fall apart when squeezed dry of whey in a double-handful,
you may be assured that 100° was too low a temperature at which to
cook it. The object is to cook at the lowest temperature which will
do the business within a reasonable time. The higher the temperature
used, the quicker it will be cooked, but it will require more milk to
make a pound of cheese. A good yield and a good quality must both be
gotten out of the milk—these are fine points in cheese making. The
curd we have spoken of has stood in the whey at 100° degrees for one
hour and a half and is yet insufficiently cooked. An hour longer at
the same temperature would probably cook it to the right degree, but
there are objections to letting curd stand in the whey so long—it
gets whey soaked and begins to disintegrate slightly, even when no
acid is perceptible. So, after a ninety minute test, (or, better yet,
before), raise the temperature two, four, six or ten degrees, as your
judgment warrants, and bring it to a firm consistency as quickly as
possible.

We are now supposed to be working spring or fall milk that is
obstinately sweet and very hard to cook. In summer or warm weather,
milk is, of course, mature; this aids and hastens the cooking process
while sweetness retards it. In cool weather and with good milk,
having found that a minimum of 100° will not cook the curd after
standing at that temperature an hour and a half, fix your standard
higher and bring it within the rule prescribed. Be sure that your
curd is thoroughly cooked. Thousands of boxes of weak, half raw
cheese are thrown on the market every spring that are deficient in
quality through a lack of heat in the vat. The most convenient and
sure test of which I am aware, to tell that the curd is “done,” so
to speak, is to grasp a large double-handful and compress it dry of
whey; if it quickly, after pressure is withdrawn, falls easily apart
on the palm of the outstretched hand, you may be sure that your curd
is thoroughly cooked in every way.

Now we come to acid.


ACID.

Acid microbes are inherent in the lacteal structure and come dormant
in the milk from the udder. As soon as they feel the atmosphere
they spring into spontaneous activity, however retarded by cold or
fostered by heat. Acid in milk is a species of yeast fermentation and
is the first step toward decomposition. It is the best servant the
cheese maker has and is also his worst enemy when the relation is
changed to that of master. In a temperate climate, in hay produced
milk, in the spring of the year, acid is nearly dormant and there
is but little use for it. Hay cheese are expected to be thrown on
the market in cool weather when they will be quickly consumed;
therefore, the additional firmness given by acid is not required
to be applied as a safeguard against heat. If early hay cheese are
cooked enough and salted about two pounds to the thousand, it is all
that is desirable. On the border between hay and grass the weather
is gradually moderating and there is torrid temperature in sight in
the immediate future. Acid now begins to appear in the whey and curd
you are working by the time you have it scalded. It has a right to
be there for it is your friend and you now need its timely proffered
assistance. If, through unusually good quality of milk, it does not
come to the front, coax it a little in the following way: After the
curd is cooked and before whey is drawn, turn on steam and re-warm
the whole mass, then draw the whey and pack the curd in bulk as much
as possible, covering it up with a cloth. This will soon set the acid
to working in good shape. Always rely on the hot iron test to locate
acid. It takes an expert to get the amount of acid even from mess
to mess by an olfactory measurement. On March and the first half of
April stock I do not care for any acid to show, but on later April
and beginning of May goods acid should show on the hot iron clearly
and perceptibly. When the curd is pressed to the metal, fine strings
should just start from it immediately prior to salting. At this time
you want just a little acid but not too much—too much will surely
spoil spring made cheese.

The question arises, “How far must a cheese maker probe into the
hidden mysteries that shroud the digestive assimilation of the
product he manufactures?” We answer that he cannot probe too deeply
or extend his researches too far into the minute. There are too many
makers now with only a superficial knowledge of their craft, and
before there can be any perceptible elevation of quality in American
cheese the shoes of these novices must be filled by such men as we
now term “experts.” Take, for example, the subject of acid which
we are here discussing. A maker who can perceive it only as it is
revealed by stringing on the iron is not competent to be in charge
of a factory, for anybody could detect it there. The development of
lactic acid is a species of fermentation induced by the spontaneous
increase of inherent minute bacteria. It takes the same experience
to perceive and govern it in milk and cheese as it does practice
with square and compass to become a carpenter. We cannot _tell_ you
all about it—it will take many days of careful observation and fine
testing to understand its nature enough to make it your servant
in the cheese making art. That is why makers without practical
experience are always incompetent. Hold curd in the whey until it
shows at least a quarter of an inch of acid by the hot iron and then
draw off whey as quickly as possible. It is always a good plan where
you have large vats and they are pretty well filled to have a third
of the whey drawn off before acid develops, for then you can more
quickly lay bare your curd. As the whey recedes, push the curd with
the rake head toward the upper end of the vat and then tip the vat
down, so that the whey will flow out from the lowest corner. Make
a gutter with your hands through the center of the curd mass and
distribute it in an even pack on each side of the vat. Now, take a
knife and cut it into strips eight inches wide, drawing the knife
from the center gutter toward the side of the vat. Flop these strips
upside down and, to farther facilitate drainage, cut a longitudinal
canal next to the sides of the vat. Examine by the iron and see how
the curd is working as to acid; if it is maturing slowly and the curd
is not hot, shut off all draughts of air, cut the curd into “bricks”
or blocks the size of a brick, and scatter them over the bottom of
the vat. Then cover the vat up with the same cloth that you used
when scalding. If, on the other hand, the curd is hot and maturing
rapidly, cut into small bricks, scatter well and give it all the
air possible, frequently turning the bricks over. Unless positively
unavoidable on account of overplus of acid never grind curd until
you have cooled it down to a temperature of 80°. Above that heat the
fine texture of the curd is torn and mutilated so that it will give
out white whey, and, as a consequence, waste of quality and substance
ensues.

The curd being first well drained and cooled to 80° by subdivision
of pieces and having also developed acid sufficient for the season,
it is ready for the mill. Grind with deliberation, and if you have a
self-salter, so much the better. Incorporate the salt into the curd
by thorough, although not violent, mixing and then air your curd.
This is one of the most important processes of all and yet the one
most neglected by negligent makers. A curd requires airing, not so
much to expel heat as to expunge the gaseous odors that have followed
it down from its animal origin. Stir it well at frequent intervals
and spread it out well over the surface of the vat. So calculate that
it can lay twenty minutes or half an hour before it has sunk to the
temperature of 70°, when it is just right for the hoops. Allowing it
to lay this length of time gives the salt an opportunity to strike
into the pores and impregnate the product with its saline properties
before being put under pressure.


HOOPING CURD.

On placing curd in the hoop measure it all in a pail and then you
will get the cheese of nearly an exact weight. When spreading on the
cap cloth wring it out of warm water, that last thing stirring up the
surface curd from below, so that there will be warmth to form a good
rind. Apply the pressure slowly at first, and as soon as the whey
starts from the hoops with a “gush,” desist and let them rest for a
few moments. The reason for this is to retain the salt and not expel
it with the whey by an injudicious display of strength. You have,
perhaps, considered two pounds or two and a half of salt per 1,000
pounds of milk just right for the curd and the season of the year,
and it would be most unwise and foolish to let it dribble away to the
detriment of the product. As soon as the whey ceases to start freely
come down snugly on them with the lever and then turn your attention
to washing up the vat and utensils.


CLEANING TIN UTENSILS.

This part of a maker’s duties has an important bearing on cheese
manufacture, for if he is a sloven it does but little good for
patrons to strive to furnish him with pure, sweet milk. Wash the vat
and utensils through two waters and scald with that which is boiling.
The vat and all utensils should be scoured at least once a week with
salt, to prevent the propagation of a yellow and white fungus growth
that is a persistent parasite of factories. Milk strainers should
be hung out where the bright sunshine can reach them, and all the
windows and outside doors to the make-room should be opened, to drive
out the dampness that has accumulated during the forepart of the day.


PULLING UP THE BANDAGE CLOTH.

In from fifteen to twenty minutes after hooping curd turn your
attention to them again. If the old style hoops are used you will
be obliged to bandage them by hand; if not, to pull up the bandage
cloth. As the former way is nearly obsolete, we will simply discuss
the _modus operandi_ of the latter.

Set a pailful of clean warm water near you, and as you remove the cap
cloths rinse them vigorously in this, to wash out all sour whey. Pull
the margin of the bandage up and turn it neatly over the edge of the
cheese; then, wringing the cap slightly, to remove only the surplus
water, spread it over the surface, smoothing out all wrinkles. Apply,
now, all the power that you have, that is, reasonable power. You do
not want to press so hard that the butter will be crushed out of the
cheese structure, but you want to press so as to expel all whey and
permanently solidify the cheese. I examined 1888 made cheese this
spring that were of fine quality but insufficiently pressed. The
seams and cracks were mouldy and damp with whey, which damaged an
otherwise fancy product 50 per cent.


CLEANING UP.

Cleaning up is the last duty of the cheese maker for the day. I use
hot water freely on any portion of the floor with which whey has
come in contact, and especially should it be used about the spouts
and drains, for it is here that filth lurks and easily conceals
itself. Boiling water will search it out and eradicate it; dash it on
copiously all around. Sal-soda and potash are helpful aids to keep
the make-room sweet, and a liberal supply should be counted among the
necessities of every factory.




THE CURING ROOM.


It is just as easy to have a model curing room as one that is
defective in structure. A cheese may be turned out of the hoop
the acme of perfection in every detail of manufacture, and yet
subsequently be damaged partly or wholly ruined by inhabiting a
faulty curing apartment. The curing room should not be in a loft,
or above the make-room. It should be on the ground floor, and for
convenience it should open direct from the make-room, the door being
easy of access to the press. The partition between the two rooms
must be impervious to the steam arising from the cheese vats, as the
animal vapor is detrimental to the maturing product on the shelves.
The room should by all means be plastered, and have windows that can
be lowered from the top when necessary for proper ventilation. In
these times when cheese are frequently shipped when only ten days
from the hoop, a large curing room is not necessary even for a large
factory. The smaller you can have it without crowding, the better.
If you want a room that will hold 300 cheese, lay shelves 2½ feet
above the floor that will accommodate 100, put in stout uprights 7½
feet high, and on cross pieces above lay two more tiers of shelves of
the same surface capacity as the bottom counter. When it is finished
you have three tiers of shelves encircling the room, save for two
doors, with space left in the center for a box stove. The object of
arranging shelves one above another is not so much to utilize space
as it is to scientifically cure the product. It, however, answers
for both purposes. In a room, temperature rises with height, and the
atmosphere is, of course, several degrees warmer near the ceiling
than in the region of the floor. Hang a reliable thermometer on a
range with the second tier of shelves, in a portion of the room where
it will not be affected by direct heat from the stove. In this
position the mercury should range from 65° to 70° Fahrenheit, the
temperature on the top shelf at the same time rising to the vicinity
of 75° Fahrenheit. We will be supposed to carry a day’s make of
cheese into such a room when it is empty. Place them all on the top
shelf in regular order, two deep. Continue to add from day to day
until the top shelf is completely filled all around. Then begin at
the end where you first started, and take down the first day’s make
and place on the second shelf, arranging those fresh from the hoop
in their place. Continue this process all around until the second
tier is filled. Your next move will necessitate two removals, leaving
the oldest on the bottom tier and the greenest on top. As soon as a
cheese leaves the hoop a certain warmth of atmosphere is necessary to
assist the process of fermentation that should at once begin. If this
warmth is lacking green cheese will sour on the shelves before they
can cure. Therefore, always place them in the most favorable position
for assistance in the direction of maturity that you have at command.




CARE OF CHEESE.


Take cheese from the hoops after they have been under pressure about
eighteen hours. If they have been properly made and thoroughly
cooked, and the cap cloths are sweet and clean, the latter will peel
from the ends without making an abrasion of the rind. Allow them
to stand an hour or so on the shelves before greasing; the surface
moisture will then have evaporated, and the rinds will deepen to a
golden color and become crisp and slightly rough under the touch.
Heat whey butter as hot as you can bear your hand in it, and, using
a large piece of bandage cloth (no other cloth is as good), dip it
in the hot grease and apply by a thorough rubbing-in to the cheese
surface. The butter being hot will strike in and lend toughness and
elasticity to the rind. Date the cheese after they have been on the
shelves a day. The bandage cloth will then have become dry, and the
dates can be made to show clear and distinct. Turn cheese over every
day and rub them thoroughly with a sponge of bandage cloth, well
oiled. Dealers, retailers and consumers insist on a good, perfect
rind, and, as makers, we must give it to them. Appearance sometimes
goes farther than quality, but we want both, and want them united.
Sometimes cheese will mould on the sides during damp, muggy weather
in summer. It will not do to drive out the dampness with fire, so
establish a free circulation of air through the room and the mould
will cease to accumulate. In a curing room it is easier to keep
temperature where you want it during cool than in hot weather. If the
mercury gets to running up above 75° Fahrenheit, sprinkle the floor
vigorously with cold water, take out the window sashes, and on the
south side keep the blinds closed, or a shade down. Good cheese can
endure a temperature of 80° for a while without deteriorating, but
such a heat is not desirable; keep it below that if possible during
a hot wave. The shelves on which the cheese rest should be of sound
lumber, smoothly planed basswood or pine, and each board a little
wider than the diameter of the cheese. Care should be taken to have
the bandages the exact circumference of the inside of the hoop. If
the band is contracted, the cloth will split open under pressure and
expose the cheese to the attack of skipper flies; if too large, the
cheese will expand on the shelf and make it difficult to be jammed
into a box for shipment. The reason the curing room should not be
over the make apartment, or in a loft, is that in the former the
vapor and odors generated below are not desirable curing factors, and
in both cases excessive heat is unavoidable, due to the elevation and
the direct rays of the sun on the roof. When cheese get so warmed
up that the butter starts, the flavor is deteriorating also. While
curing, cheese need ventilation, draughts of air should be avoided,
as thereby the surfaces are dried up and checked. Too much light is
not desirable in a curing room; shades should be used at the windows
to regulate this. It is now customary to ship cheese as soon as they
cease to be curdy, which occurs in from ten to fifteen days from the
hoop.




EXPERIENCED HELP.

One great set-back to good cheese making is inexperienced and
careless labor. This is another cog in the wheel that has been
retrograding the reputation of our goods during the last few years.
A medical student cannot obtain a diploma authorizing him to take
under his charge the welfare of the sick without three years’ study
aided by ocular demonstrations of his especial science. Then, he
is expected not to have a dim idea of a patient’s condition when
diagnosing his case, but to know and understand all about it. No
cheese maker is fit for duty unless he can diagnose the condition
of a vat of milk on a quick examination. The natural odor of pure
milk has a peculiar animal smell, whose nature can be acquired by
careful olfactory tests indulged in as the student draws the fluid
from the cow’s teats. After an apprentice at the business can tell
pure, sweet, untainted milk in any spot or place, he must learn to
distinguish between that which is tainted and that which is verging
on the sour. Tainted milk is radically different from sour milk,
and infused in the product they each tend toward utterly diverse
results. To pass a correct judgment on milk quality is thus essential
No. 1 in a maker’s practical knowledge. Requirement No. 2, is to
have a thorough understanding of the constituents and influence of
all of the foreign ingredients that go into cheese. Rennet, the
most potent auxiliary of the cheese maker’s craft, should never be
handled or applied by ignorant hands. The amateur maker should gain a
physiological insight into the lactic portion of animal anatomy, and
have an intelligent comprehension of the active force of the peptic
secretion. When such knowledge is acquired he will see the importance
of never countenancing any coagulating fluid that is not immaculately
pure in extraction and free from any subsequent taint. He will also
understand its nature enough to always make a judicious application
of it to the milk designed for manufacture. Here the necessity of
step No. 1 joining hands with No. 2 is apparent, for he cannot make
a judicious application unless his olfactory sense is trained to
perceive and gauge every variation of the milk quality. Necessity No.
3, is in following the quality variation of milk into the cooking and
maturing curd. It is a well-known fact with cheese makers that no two
vats of curd will scarcely ever work exactly alike in succession. If
one is to know absolutely just what to do and what to leave undone at
certain moments of assimilation and maturity in curd, he must have
gained that knowledge not from books but from continued practical
experience. Here the necessity for previous learning arises. No
pettifogger would be expected to argue legal points before the
Supreme Court, because lack of advancement in the rudiments of his
profession would make him as unfit for such a pleader as a farmer
or merchant. Every man to his business, and no man to be trusted
in any trade capacity until he has proved himself competent. So,
if an amateur lawyer or doctor is not to be trusted, why should
responsibility be placed on the shoulders of a green hand at cheese
making? He is expected to properly prepare an important article of
human food, and, inexperienced and ignorant of the rudiments of the
trade, he stumbles along in the dark, doing, perhaps, the best that
he can, and not so much to blame for the failures that accrue as are
his employers.

Wide dispersion of training schools for both butter and cheese makers
is not far off, and I, for one, hail that day with delight.




WHERE OUR CHEESE GOES TO.


After contemplating the immensity of our annual cheese output, the
question naturally arises, “Where does it all go to?” The earliest
shipments of American cheese were made from New York to England in
1835 and 1836. The beginning was very limited; shipments of cheese
were made in casks; $60,000 would probably comprise the value of all
shipments made in those years. As England still remains our principal
foreign customer, we will come down to the year 1882 and give the
official figures of the port of New York of the annual receipts and
exports. We do not mean to intimate that England takes _all_ of our
exports, but she absorbs the major portion of them.

                                  Year.    Receipts.    Exports.
  Receipts of Cheese in New York, 1882,    2,350,559    1,898,192
     ”          ”         ”       1883,    2,456,232    1,957,967
     ”          ”         ”       1884,    2,407,550    1,932,702
     ”          ”         ”       1885,    2,122,187    1,658,696
     ”          ”         ”       1886,    1,943,260    1,575,262
     ”          ”         ”       1887,    1,994,857    1,450,955
     ”          ”         ”       1888,    1,993,462

The 1888 export is not recorded yet. It is hard to get at the home
trade quantity used throughout the country. There are many cheese
distributed from factories to neighboring towns in Ohio, Wisconsin,
Michigan and other states of which no account is kept, and there are
no statistics covering the entire make, but at a guess we should
say it was about 4,000,000 boxes annually. The cause of decline in
receipts at the port of New York since 1882, is largely due to the
fact that a good many cheese made in the northern part of this State
(N. Y.) are bought by Canadians and shipped _via_ Montreal. It is
said that Englishmen eat twelve pounds of cheese _per capita_ a year,
while Americans eat three pounds. Cheese consumption is, however,
on the increase here, as the healthy and nutritive qualities of
the product are more and more appreciated. One of the most serious
drawbacks to universal cheese consumption is the large profits
exacted by middlemen when they dispense it to the public. If cheese
could be had at the grocery for 9 or 10 cents per pound instead of
14 or 15 cents, it would be found in abundance on the poor man’s
table, and a heavy decrease in the export trade would result. We
believe that such a time is coming, and with it will come a vast
improvement in the average quality of the national make. This is not
a mere speculation, but a distinctive pointer of the times, and its
verification is already at hand. Thirty-five years ago the innovation
of the cheddar process gave cheese quality its first great advance.
That advance remains yet to be perfected in detail, and then a cheese
millennium will reign.




MOISTURE IN CHEESE.


One of the most essential points in determining the quality of a
cheese is the amount of moisture it contains. A proper retention of
moisture by the product in a cured state depends primarily on the
rennet that separated it from the watery serum of milk, and secondly
on the amount of heat applied in cooking, and the quantity of salt
afterwards added. To adjust all these little niceties to a minimum
of fine, even quality of which moisture is an adjunct, requires
experience and long familiarity with the handling and treatment of
milk. Butter, moisture and caseine should exist in about equal parts
to make a mellow cheese, and, to fix the proportion rightly, enough
rennet should be incorporated into the milk to expel all excess of
moisture, and yet leave enough to withstand the effect of a heat
judiciously gauged to cook it. Thus, rennet influences moisture on
the start, and other forces afterward are introduced that either aid
or retard it. When rennet diffuses itself through milk its power and
potency are largely measured by the temperature of the fluid body
surrounding it. As cheese making is merely an imitation of nature’s
workings in curdling milk in a calf’s stomach, the nearer we can
follow that process on the start, the closer to perfection we get.
Long experience has demonstrated that a temperature between 80° and
85° Fahrenheit is the best degree of warmth for milk to have attained
when it receives the peptic fluid. A temperature above that expels
the butter globules into the whey, and below, the active principle
of rennet is not brought out and tardily and incompletely coagulates
the mild solids. By afterward applying the lowest degree of heat that
will cook it within a reasonable time to a consistency of contraction
and expansion, the moisture still remains in proper proportion. A few
degrees of excess heat will produce a dry, hard curd, and a future
dry, hard cheese. Judgment, discretion, and experience are necessary
in applying salt to retain moisture. Salt itself is, of course, a
moisture retainer, but a too heavy application hardens and stiffens
the cheese structure and retards the curing of the product. Never
salt more than enough to give and retain flavor and preserve quality.
If the points we have given above have all been observed, then the
proper proportion of moisture in cheese will be assured.

Prominent English cheese judges have passed verdicts on fine
cheese in the following words: “We want cheese rich, solid, fine
flavored, true colored, that is, of an even color throughout, sound,
handsome, that will go on to improve for twelve months or longer if
desired.” “A good cheese is close and firm in texture, yet mellow;
in character or quality it is rich with a tendency to melt in the
mouth; the flavor full and fine, apparently that of a hazel-nut.”
“The characteristics of a good cheese are mellow and rich in taste
and flavor, and firm and full in texture, solid but not tough.”
“A good cheese is rich without being greasy, with a sweet, nutty
flavor, clear and equal color throughout, and of a compact, solid
texture, without being waxy; firm, and yet melts easily in the mouth,
leaving no rough or ill-flavor on the palate.” The English conception
of peerless cheese is ours, too, and we must continue to grind away
on the road of improvement until we bring the united product to the
standard of unimpeachable quality and uniformity.




RULE FOR MAKING OUT DIVIDENDS.


Many makers are now expected to figure out the milk dividends for
the patrons, and issue fortnightly statements. A quick, easy rule
to follow in doing this business, is to first foot up each patron’s
milk for the number of days’ delivery in one or two sales, as the
case may be, draw a line across the page of the factory account
book opposite the date sold up to, and, as you add each man’s milk,
set the amount down opposite his name on the tally slate. After you
have summed it all up, go over it again, adding from the top of the
columns downward. This will correct any mistakes you may have made.
Next, add the separate sums of milk together into one grand total
and, using this united sum for a dividend, take the number of pounds
of cheese in the sale or sales for a divisor, and the quotient will
be the ratio or the number of pounds of milk it has taken to make a
pound of cheese. Then, multiply the number of pounds of cheese by the
price per 100 pounds you get for making, and deduct the product from
the full cash amount that the cheese has brought. The residue money
divide up proportionately among the patrons as follows: Using the
grand total of milk for a divisor, see how many times it is contained
in the money, minus cost of making. The quotient will be the net
price of one hundred pounds of milk. Multiply each patron’s separate
amount of milk by this price per hundred pounds, and the product
will be the net monied income on that sale or sales for the patron.
In getting the price of a pound of milk it is seldom necessary to
carry decimally beyond mills. In a measure, the work all proves
itself, for, if, by adding together the face value of each patron’s
check, the amount does not agree with the cheese returns, less
making, your figuring will need a review.

It is customary now to send out with each check a statement
demonstrating and setting forth just how the factory business is
running. Thus, each patron becomes a critic of the secretary. I
append a statement properly filled out:


SALE STATEMENT.

  _Plainfield, N. Y., June 20, 1889._

E. W. WRIGHT’S CHEESE FACTORY.

IN ACCOUNT WITH

MR. JOHN WILLIAMS.

  Sold from May 14th to 29th.
  ===================================================
  No. Boxes,                                     168
  Total Milk,                                 69,779
  Total Cheese,                                7,026
  Price per pound, 3,434 @ 8¼-c. 3,592 @ 8⅛-c.
  Ratio,                                        9.93
  Net price per 100 pounds Milk,                71.3
  Your Milk,                                   8,336
  Amount less making,                         $59.43




THE WHEY VAT.


The whey vat may be regarded as a necessary evil, but with
means at hand to relieve ourselves of some of its putrefactive
characteristics. We trust that the day for having this swill tub
harnessed to the factory will soon be an item of the shady past.
Whey is all right in its place, but its place, as soon as it is
drained from the curd, is a long distance from the factory building.
I would place the whey vat ten rods away from the factory, and if
night delivery of milk was the rule, I would move it _twenty_ rods
off. Get it at least beyond contaminating distance, and then have
the whey carried to it in open tin troughs. If the troughs are
thoroughly painted you need not fear rust, and as they are of metal
they cannot dry up, warp and leak. Have the spouts about the factory
perfectly tight so that no whey can fall to the ground, for it is
fearful stuff to generate offensive effluvia. Try and keep the whey
receptacle as neat and clean as possible. Have it roofed, but open
on the sides. Skim the cream from it every morning, and it would be
much better if you would churn it fresh instead of keeping it for
weeks to be rendered out in a kettle by fire. Scrub the vat out every
day with a broom; it will take five minutes’ time and a pailful of
hot water. Make it a rule for each patron to draw away no more than
three pails of whey for every hundred pounds of milk delivered. Also,
make it a rule to yard nobody’s pigs or calves about the premises for
convenient whey slopping. Insist on it that if your patrons insist on
drawing sour whey home in their milk cans they put on extra “elbow
grease” afterward in cleansing them. A cheese maker hardly likes to
make the imputation to patrons that their wives are not neat (only,
perhaps, when they are in a great hurry) about scalding out the sour
whey from milk cans, and yet such insinuations on his part are often
necessary.




WHYS AND WHEREFORES.


Curd is first cut with the horizontal knife, to facilitate easy
expulsion of the whey.

Cheese is a good edible, because, besides being highly nutritive,
the rennet or gastric juice it contains aids digestion and the
assimilation of other foods.

Whey should never be fed to cows, because, having once been secreted
in their mammillary glands in the form of milk, it has now taken on
the nature of an excrement; consequently, a re-secretion would be
highly prejudicial to the quality and healthfulness of the product.

It was formerly supposed that febrine was exclusively a constituent
of animal blood; but now the theory that slight traces of it in milk
induce rennet coagulation is generally accepted as authentic.

If a cheese is misshapen, by uneven pressing or otherwise, when taken
from the hoop, put it back and press it over again. Remember that
appearance goes a long way with dealers. Do not tolerate any cheese
in the room that are deformed.

Cheese makers should insist that patrons with large messes of milk
set their night’s yield in two cans, thoroughly air the fluid, by
stirring or dipping immediately subsequent to milking, and then dump
both portions together in the morning, so as not to mix night’s and
morning’s milk until it is mixed in common in the cheese vat. If
this rule is insisted upon and faithfully observed, a great deal of
damaged milk will be avoided.

A quack doctor should as soon be granted a diploma to practice, as an
ignorant apprentice at cheese making be given the responsibility of
the manufacture of a vat of milk. The health of the community is in
great danger from both frauds.

Cheese that are surface mottled, spread the bandage and show a soft,
weak rind, have been insufficiently cooked. The remedy lies in a more
upward tendency of the mercury.

The art of cheese making cannot be learned wholly from paper, because
variations of milk quality constantly clash with regular modes of
procedure. Here the practical experience and sound judgment of the
maker must intervene and offset the lacteal variation, by appropriate
changes in the manner of working the product.

Making good cheese out of poor milk is much talked of by makers
and considered quite an accomplishment. It consists in clothing
the product in a glamour of deception, propagating dyspepsia and
shielding careless dairymen.

Skimmed cheese is dry and tasteless and unfit for human food, because
the meat has been extracted, and the shell left. It should take a
back seat on the bench of humiliation beside oleomargarine.

When whey sparkles it is sour.

When raw curd settles quickly after being cut up, it is a signal
that it is aging rapidly and developing acid. White scum on the whey
indicates the presence of acid.

Butter exuding slightly from the hoops of pressing cheese tells
of acid and bespeaks a fine quality of goods. Butter exuding in
excessive quantity from the hoops is proof that the milk has either
been violently shaken up over rough roads or has been set at a very
high temperature.

You cannot get a good rind on a poor quality of cheese; you can
always have a perfect rind on one of good quality. Thus, in one
sense, the rind indicates the quality.

“Cleanliness is next to godliness” about a factory, because, milk
being an animal fluid it is of nitrogenous composition, and the waste
that accrues from it on decomposition becomes the most fetid carrion.

Buttermilk added to sweet milk in making cheese is a diabolical
habit, the object, nowadays, being not to produce cheese from slop
but from pure, wholesome milk alone.

Airing curds thoroughly after salting is necessary to expel gaseous
odors. The improved quality of the cheese will repay every maker for
doing it.

Never cease to agitate the question of only six days’ labor in the
week for the cheese maker. Agitate it, because God has laid it down
as a commandment for all mankind, and nature inexorably exacts from
the physical forces every violation of the rule.

Keep the curing room at an even temperature of from 65° to 70°
Fahrenheit, because a less amount of heat might sour the green cheese
on the shelves and more warmth might cause them to lose butter to the
point of off flavor.

Keep the surface of cheese impervious to fly attacks and you will
never be troubled with skippers.

Never use sour press clothes on cheese, not only from sense of
neatness, but because the rank acid will check the rind.

If you are caught with a soft curd on your hands, one that has
soured so quickly that you have had no opportunity to give it a firm
cook, grind it twice and stir it more than usual. This will reduce
pulpy lumps, add stability to the curd and prevent the cheese from
spreading out of shape in the bandage.

Rennet is the life and soul of cheese, as much depending on its
efficacy as on yeast in bread. Excessive heat stifles and kills out
its virtue and leaves the cheese structure dead and indigestible.
Makers should bear this fact in mind and never allow the cooking curd
to rest long on the bottom of the vat.

The rennet jar should never be covered, as nothing can be mentioned
that is more liable to contract fetid taint than these skins.
Exclusion of air from the vessel in which they are soaking is
extremely liable to spoil them in spite of the salt the liquor
contains.

In weighing patrons’ milk at the factory, the scales should be
balanced down and up weight taken. To the uninitiated this might at
first seem an injustice, but a little experience will soon show that
it is imperatively necessary. The dealers to whom the cheese are
consigned exact stiff up weight, and if the same is not taken at the
milk delivery window, woe be to the ratio. As all patrons are served
alike in the premises, no loss or injustice accrues to any one and
the maker is in a position to deal as he is being dealt with.

Pulverize salt thoroughly before sprinkling it over the curd. Hard
lumps will not dissolve and will produce cauterized spots through the
cheese.

During the hot weather of summer remember that curd will stand a
third more souring, and yet come down into mellow cheese, than it
would earlier or later in the season. Bearing this fact in mind gives
a maker mental relief when he has a curd that has the start of him on
acid and yet afterward comes out all right, perhaps making the best
cheese in the room.

Saving curd over to mix in with the next day’s cheese is not
desirable, but it is often unavoidable, as cheese of as even weight
as possible are always wanted. Take the curd to be saved over and put
it in a bag of bandage cloth. Mix into it an extra handful of salt,
in order to prevent too much souring, and hang the sack in a cool,
dry place. The next day, just prior to drawing the whey, empty the
old curd into the vat and stir it up with the new.

There are sometimes extreme cases of butter separation from the
cooked caseine. I have seen where butter would settle in the seams
and cavities of cheese, to the almost utter ruination of the product
and the distraction of the maker because he could not discern and
stop the cause. There are many causes, some of which are beyond the
power of the maker to remedy, such as churning the milk in drawing
it to the factory over stony roads, etc. But he can prevent too high
heat at setting time, and he can manipulate milk with gentleness
before the rennet is added.

In consigning cheese to market always put the consignor’s name on the
side instead of one cover of the box. Covers are apt to come off in
transit and get mixed with those of other consignments, entailing
much trouble to those concerned.

When coagulated milk has reached the right consistency to cut up,
draw the curd knife through it at a moderate speed, truly and
unwaveringly. The cutting behind an experienced hand will expel whey
clear and green in color. In this item of procedure let your hand be
counted among the experienced.




POTENT MAXIMS FOR THE CHEESE MAKER.


Keep a perfectly sweet, clean vat and spotless, shining apparatus and
utensils.

Make an olfactory test of every mess of milk before it is dumped into
the weighing can, and reject all that is tainted, unclean or tending
toward the sour, as by the acceptance of such injured milk you damage
your own trade reputation, detract from the dividend of every patron
who furnishes perfect milk and irreparably wrong every consumer of
the cheese.

Insist on each one of your patrons straining their milk through a
fine cloth strainer of double thickness, and use the same yourself
for it to pass through into the vat.

In heating up your milk to a temperature to meet a reception of the
rennet, stir it frequently and gently.

Never set above 86° Fahrenheit in spring and fall and 84° in summer.

Remember that too high heat before setting separates the butter
globules from the milk structure and that they are subsequently lost
in the whey.

Use nothing but stone jars for keeping rennet. If a mess of rennet
worth, perhaps, a dollar should get slightly tainted, throw it away
rather than impregnate it through $200 worth of cheese and cause
serious illness among numerous human beings.

Use only annottoine cut directly from the seed by the chemical action
of potash.

The imputation that urine is used in the paste preparation should
make every manufacturer shun it with loathing until the vile stigma
is disproved.

Be at least five minutes in stirring the rennet into milk. Stir
it with great gentleness, so that the butter globules will not be
displaced.

Curd should stand not less than forty or more than sixty minutes
after the application of rennet before cutting, the variation in
time to be governed by season, condition of milk and desired keeping
qualities. Curd is fit to cut up when it will split clean before
the finger but is not so brittle as to break before the advancing
knife. Cut first with the horizontal knife lengthways, then crossway,
then lengthways with the perpendicular blade. If milk is very ripe,
and a quick scald is necessary, cut once more crossway with the
perpendicular blade. Never slash curd in cutting, as it starts milky
whey and lowers your yield.

After cutting curd if milk is in normal condition, it is, perhaps,
better to agitate the curd gently for a few moments before heat is
applied. If milk has already taken on acid, apply heat immediately
after cutting. In agitating curd use the hands for the first fifteen
minutes, then manipulate it with a rake.

Stir only enough to keep it separated and prevent it from scorching
on the hot bottom of the vat.

Remember that cooking curd thoroughly is, without doubt, the most
important part of the whole programme of cheese making.

Do not place sole reliance on thermometer figures—let your judgment
rule supreme above that. See that every day’s curd—the product of
milk in all stages of maturity—does not part with the whey until it
is cooked to a state of contractibility in which the cubes will
separate by expansion after pressure by squeezing in the hand. No
maker considers his bread free from rawness until it has received a
certain amount of heat in the oven, and no cheese maker can expect
to get a mellow, firm cheese unless he cooks his curd as above
described. By using the smallest amount of heat possible to cook curd
within a reasonable time, a finer quality of cheese is secured and a
better yield.

Hold curd in the whey until it will string fine threads, one-fourth
of an inch in length, on the hot iron.

Aim to have the whey well drained out of the curd before it is
ground. Do not grind curd when it is too hot. If necessary, cut into
small blocks or strips and scatter over the bottom of the vat, to
cool to a temperature to about 85° Fahrenheit before grinding.

Cheese makers should not be too much wedded to fixed rules. For
instance, do not always hold curd in the whey until it shows a
quarter of an inch of acid by the iron simply because it may be a
rule. Let your judgment rise supreme over all rules. Frequently,
through the summer there are cool nights when the milk keeps so sweet
that the next day no acid will show by the time you have the curd
thoroughly cooked. At such times, as an experiment, draw off the whey
sweet and let the curd develop acid in the pack. For your particular
locality, quality of milk and character of feed, such a method may
produce finer cheese than if soured in the whey, and it may not. You
must test all of these little details to find out.

Two pounds of salt and the fractional parts of a third pound, up to
sixteen ounces per 1,000 pounds of milk, covers the cheese maker’s
scale for the season in this department. As a rule, two pounds in
the spring, with a gradual ascendancy in quantity as the apex of hot
weather approaches, and then a declination in quantity toward fall,
is about the average amount used per 1,000 pounds of milk for the
Cheddar process. There are more makers who do not salt above two and
a half pounds in hot weather than there are who use three pounds.
High salting retards curing, and the object now is to get a new
cheese onto the market as quickly as possible. With a wet curd salt a
little more than the rule by which you are running, so as to make up
the loss that goes out with the whey.




CHEESE FOR THE BRITISH MARKET.


This quality of goods, generally known as “shipping cheese,” is made
by the same process that we have described in this book with the
exception that it is, or should be, worked down more. “Worked down”
implies that a firmer cheese is produced, one cooked more, salted a
trifle higher and soured more. These requisites lend a cheese body
and prolong its keeping qualities. With all this, it must be mellow,
close textured and fine flavored. The English consumer wants such a
cheese, or he wants none. “A word to the wise is sufficient.”




SKIMMED CHEESE.


Making edible skimmed cheese is an effort to supply a constituent
for the product that does not exist, namely, oleaginous matter. The
butter or cream in milk is what gives rich flavor and mellow body to
cheese. When a part or whole of this is removed by the skimmer, the
depleted fluid, if manufactured into cheese, just as that containing
all of the cream would be, will make dry, tasteless stuff. Skimmed
cheese must be cooked, soured and salted less than full cream. Flat
skims can often be scalded at 93° and 94° Fahrenheit. But, of course,
this must be governed entirely by the rules relating to thorough
cooking.




FLOATING CURD.


Floating curd emanates from the rankest known species of tainted
milk. The curd is surfeited with offensive, poisonous gas, that
holds in check the acid and will inhabit the curd until its life has
died out. All the cheese maker can do is to wait patiently until its
existence has ended and the curd, ceasing to be inflative, develops
acid. Then grind and salt the usual amount, airing by thorough
stirring for an hour or more, with doors and windows open, to expel
the taint. Let it sour in the pack. If ground and salted before gas
has left it, the cheese will huff up like puff balls.




BOXING CHEESE FOR MARKET.


After the cheese designed for shipment are selected, examine every
one and look to it that there are no surface shortcomings; if there
are, the discrepancy must be remedied. Aim to have the cheese go into
the package neat and attractive in appearance. A firm, elastic rind,
well oiled, and a spotless bandage cloth, if forming the cuticle
of a squarely-built, well-shaped cheese, is all in the line of the
appearance that is desired by dealers and retailers. In weighing the
cheese, give good up weight, taking no account of anything less than
a pound. Use the best quality of scale boards and boxes obtainable,
and have the latter fit the cheese snugly. After a cheese is weighed,
place a scale board on the top end and shove a box onto it. Flop box
and cheese over and, as the latter settles into the case, mark the
weight on the side of the box. If the box is too high, shave the rim
down to the cheese surface and place on a scale board and then cover.
It is imperative that the covers fit tightly and snugly, and that
any superfluous rim on the box be shaved off. No cheese is properly
prepared for transportation unless it is so tight in the box that it
cannot shift and knock about. Brand the boxes in a neat, workman-like
manner, having the lettering show plainly and distinctly. Then your
cheese are ready for the freight car or the vessel’s hold.

Cheese are often slightly mouldy on their bandaged sides when cured
in damp, warm weather. To obviate this, when boxing, rub the sides
thoroughly with a dry, soft cloth and do not box until just before
shipping. No cheese should be placed in boxes in hot weather until a
few hours before transportation. Standing for several days in tight
packages and exposed to a high temperature, will not only try the
quality of cheese but will positively injure the flavor of the very
best. If they could all go to their destination in refrigerator cars,
this evil would be greatly ameliorated. With the facilities at hand,
however, aim to place them on the market in as neat a shape as they
rested on your curing room shelves.




THE HOT IRON TEST.


I do not know what cheese makers would do nowadays without the
hot iron to guide them in evenly maturing curd. It is one of the
most essential attributes of making. It should, of course, be most
judiciously used.

In 1845, Mr. L. M. Norton, of Goshen, Conn., discovered that the acid
in curd could be gauged by stringing threads from a heated iron. He
kept the discovery a secret for a long time but at last divulged it.

To supply yourself with a handy instrument for testing acid, take
a three-quarter inch bar of iron a foot long and set one end into
a ferrule on a wooden handle. It can then be conveniently handled
without burning the fingers. Heat the metal a little hotter than
desired and then thrust for a moment into a bucket of water, to
thoroughly clean the surface. Holding it in the left hand, take a
piece of curd squeezed dry of whey and press against the iron. If it
does not adhere at all, the curd is perfectly sweet, no matter how it
may smell to you. If it clings slightly, you may be assured that acid
is beginning to develop, so keep close watch of it. Curd ought never
to string out threads more than one-fourth of an inch long before
whey is drawn, and oftentimes less is desirable.

Have the iron at just the right temperature or you cannot make an
accurate test. A right temperature implies that the iron is so hot
that the curd will fry around the edges when pressed against it, but
not so hot that it will scorch over.

Tainted and floating curds will often string threads six inches and
more in length, and then not be fitted to grind and salt. As soon
as acid has overcome the gaseous condition of such curd so that the
inflation will subside, it is ready to grind, but not before. Cheese
makers should not be afraid of souring and airing such curd too much.




MILK.


In the manufacture of cheese the constituents of milk demand our
first attention, as we cannot intelligently study a subject without
investigating its primary principles. Cow’s milk contains:

  Water                                         864 parts.
  Nitrogenous matter (caseine and albumen)       43   ”
  Sugar of milk                                  52   ”
  Fat                                            37   ”
  Mineral salts                                   4   ”
                                              —————
                                              1,000

The solids represented above are in the form of minute globules, and
the serum in which they float is the water or “whey.” It is to unite
these globules and separate them from the whey that is the primary
function of cheese making. It so happens that rennet, the active
agent in this process, besides exerting an automatic, chemical action
on milk, imparts to the solids new and vigorous properties that give
cheese a medicinal value to the human stomach, namely, an inceptor of
digestion. It is imperative that a cheese maker understands enough
about milk to instantly detect the slightest change from its sweet,
pure, normal condition. Milk as a fluid is highly sensitive to
unclean odors, and when it absorbs them in a greater or less degree,
the maker should, by an olfactory test, discover the taint. Milk
that has been tainted by a retention of the animal heat, not having
been cooled when freshly drawn, will give off a rank, burned smell,
nauseous in the extreme. If the taint was absorbed from odors, the
peculiar scent of the particular stench will be indelibly impressed
on the fluid. Mature or sour milk is more to be desired for cheese
manufacture than milk poisoned by taint. In fact, a _slight_ maturity
of milk is necessary—or, at least, desirable—to produce a fine
cheese, the same as mature cream is required to develop good butter,
only in the former the “ripeness” must be scarcely perceptible,
while in the latter it must be well advanced. All tainted milk, and
all milk that is “old” and nearly sour, should be unconditionally
rejected at the cheese factory for manufacture. Do not be afraid of
financially losing by such a rule. It is none too stringent, and
in the end it will give your goods a trade reputation that will be
secure and impregnable. The idea that really good cheese can be made
out of poor milk is disproved by chemistry and common sense.




SALT.


One of the most important factors in cheese making is the saline
mineral known as salt. A cheese can be manufactured gilt-edged in
every way, but if it contains no salt, an insufficient quantity of
it or that which is of weak, inferior quality, it is simply a mass
of perishable, nitrogenous matter that will soon go to putrefaction.
Salt checks the growth of the lactic acid as quickly as a rush of
air snuffs out a candle; therefore, it has complete control over the
quality of the cheese in this direction. It preserves that quality
for an indefinite time, provided it exists in a sufficient proportion
and the cheese has been scientifically made. Then, again, salt gives
firmness and flavor to the cheese.

Thus, perceiving that cheese, as a component of human food, could not
exist without salt, the analogy between the purity of that article
and the fine quality of cheese is at once apparent. It is needless to
advise the use of nothing but a fine, pure grade of salt for savoring
cheese. Perhaps, instead of needless, it is _needful_ to admonish
manufacturers in this regard. I regret to say that I have observed
many who held false ideas of economy about so cheap an article as
this briny product. A difference of twenty-five cents on a barrel
would turn their judgment in favor of the cheaper, coarser article,
and, while really the losers thereby, they would feel complacent over
a supposed gain.

It is just such little slights as this—substituting poor for good
salt—that help make up the discrepancy in quality already perceptible
in American cheese. The dairymen of this country possess the most
advantageous position of any class of dairymen in the world. For
years their milch cattle have been bred toward the extinction of beef
characteristics, and toward the fostering and enlargement of lacteal
tendencies, until now, in point of blood, the general average is
high. Intelligence, skilled labor and ingenuity are at command and
should so leaven the products of our dairies that they should stand
above all competitors. Then, why be “Penny wise and pound foolish,”
when so grand a prize as national trade reputation is at stake?
Cheese manufacturers, employ only the most experienced and careful
help obtainable, and be willing to pay them liberally for their
services. Look only to _the quality_ of your cheese and let the ratio
take care of itself. No matter if it takes eleven or twelve pounds of
milk to produce a pound of cheese, provided that cheese is gilt-edged
in every particular. Use nothing but first-class material, from the
rennet, coloring matter and salt that goes into the cheese to the
scale board and the box that covers it. Let the foreign demand wane
if it wants to—we know how to relish good cheese here at home just
as well as our English brothers, and, in the future, we are going to
consume more of the product _per capita_, too.




HOME-MADE CHEESE.


Exhaustive rules for manufacturing cheese on a small scale at home
occasionally go the rounds of the agricultural press. Some of them
contain ideas of real merit and some do not. All middle-aged people
who have in younger days lived in localities where dairying reached
even modest pretensions can recall the sweet-savored cheese room, an
adjunct of the kitchen, whose furnishing of primitive milk utensils
was then considered ample for the housewife’s use. Associated dairies
or factories soon came upon the stage, and their vast superiority of
method, coupled with the adoption of the cheddar system, marked an
era in cheese improvement, which said in effect, if not in words,
that “home dairy cheese must go.” The innovation of factories
undermined and swept out of existence this small fry of amateur
production, because home dairymen would not or could not adopt the
cheddar improvement and manipulate their milk with skilled labor.
Dairies associated together under factory regime facilitated such
an easy and quick disposal of one’s milk, and at such a greatly
enhanced profit, that the obvious convenience and economy of the new
order of things, more than any inimical characteristic it possessed,
pulled down the one and set up the other. It matters not, though,
to consumers in America or England, whether the cheese they eat is
made under the roof of a farm house on a small scale, or in a mammoth
factory on a large one, provided the quality is good. But there are
serious drawbacks about making up milk in diminutive quantity that
are hard to overcome. Let us discuss them and analyze their leading
features:

I think it is safe to assume that not one person out of fifty who
attempts to make home dairy cheese to-day but will manufacture it
just as his fathers did fifty years ago. In their minds the whole
process is covered by coagulation of the milk, quick cooking of the
curd, salting it and pressing it. There is no thought of having the
milk moderately mature, the curd thoroughly cooked and then properly
soured, and the salt judiciously applied. The amateur knows nothing
about the fine yet necessary points of manufacture, and so his cheese
lacks the fine but requisite points of quality to insure it trade
recognition. We all like good cheese to eat, but in this country,
thanks to the skimmer, it is getting so that the good article is very
scarce and promises to be scarcer if the skimmer’s relations with the
factory are not soon done away with.

A great many readers who live in non-cheese manufacturing districts
appreciate mellow, rich cheese when they sometimes at long intervals
find it on their groceryman’s counter, and vow that they would eat
the article more if the price was cheapened and the general quality
raised. You should, if you live a hundred miles or so from any
factory, and if you have a few cows and your neighbor has a few more,
club together and make up some cheese for your own use. You have a
vivid remembrance of how your mother used to manage it years ago.
Discard the wooden tub that she used, for now we have tin vessels
that are far preferable. Get two or three hundred pounds of milk
together, if possible, but do not rob it of a bit of cream—keep that
well worked into the fluid. Have a heavy bottomed tin box with round
corners, made at the tinner’s, one that is so shaped that it will
fit into a large caldron kettle and yet leave a couple of inches of
space between its outside surface and the iron sides of the kettle.
This space is for water, which should be used as the best conductor
to raise the temperature of the milk. Set the kettle in a brick or
stone arch, in which kindle a slow fire. With the tin vessel filled
with milk, and water about it in the way described, you have a cheese
vat in miniature. Have a thermometer handy. Stir the milk often and
do not let it get above 85° before setting. Draw the fire out before
it has fairly reached that temperature, as the after heat will raise
it a degree or two. Do not trust to your knowledge of the strength
of rennet. Buy some Rennetine and carefully follow directions as
to the amount necessary to coagulate 100 pounds of milk. Work the
rennet in thoroughly and then cover the little “vat” up with a piece
of sheeting. It is very important to have just enough rennet as too
much or too little will spoil the cheese. Have your tinner make you
two curd knives, one with perpendicular and the other with horizontal
blades. When the coagulated milk will break squarely over the finger,
and whey begins to start around the edges, cut it quite finely with
the knives, using first the perpendicular and then the horizontal
one. Raise the temperature slowly, not to 100° or 110°, but to a
point where the curd is thoroughly cooked but not to dryness. Stir
the curd and whey up at frequent intervals to keep it from packing.
Do not hustle it into the press now just because you have it cooked,
unless it is sour. Remember that the curd must mature, or, in other
words, generate acid. Therein lies the future good quality of the
cheese. Do not rely on your olfactory sense to gauge the sourness.
Press a little piece of the curd against a hot iron. When it pulls
out strings one-half of an inch long in spring, one inch long in
midsummer and one-half inch in fall, it is sour enough to be salted.
Have the whey all dipped off and the curd drained before it has
reached a maturity sufficient to salt. Do not salt in hot weather
higher than one-fourth of a pound to a hundred pounds of milk, and in
spring and fall less. As you have, at the most, only a little curd
to manipulate, do not let it get cold but put it in the hoop at a
temperature of at least 75°. Do not try to save over curd for another
batch the next day. Better have two twenty-pound cheese in two days
than one forty-pounder during the same time. You cannot graft new
curd onto old without lowering the quality of the whole. After you
have a curd in the hoop do not try to press it with stone weights
because there is so little of it. Have a small press frame and a
screw for that purpose. These small cheese will cure quickly. Keep
the ends well oiled, and lay them on a shelf in a warm room, where
they should be turned and rubbed every day.

The foregoing pointers are intended for persons who have some
previous knowledge of making dairy cheese, and, therefore, minute
details of explanation have not been given. The trouble with most
home dairy makers is that they do not realize the importance of
souring the curd, and so make weak, off-flavored, perishable stock.




OCTOBER CHEESE.


How are we to make as good cheese in October as we have been turning
out in September? This is the mental query that will sometimes arise
in the minds of makers whose experience is not measured by length of
years. A one-twelfth turn of the wheel of the yearly chronological
table ought not to produce such a vast change in lacteal affairs as
to exert a radical change in the manufacturing process. Of course,
the artificial subdivisions of the season would be of but small
moment in the case if they were not to a certain extent analogous
to natural atmospheric changes. As September wanes into October the
summer is insidiously but surely attaining its maturity. The grass
roots having in a prolific manner fulfilled their annual mission,
fail to send forth the tender blade of earlier months. Blighting
frosts sear the pastures and sap the succulence from the feed. It
is but natural that such an alteration in climatic influence should
leave its effect on the milk. It is a maxim of cheese making that
you must work milk according to its condition, not expecting one
invariable rule to cover the whole science, but keeping in mind
numberless distinct methods of treatment, for instant application as
exigencies arise.

As a general thing, less acid is deemed necessary for the October
make than was applied to the September product. I believe that in
making this important change the majority of manufacturers are too
abrupt in method and reduce the standard of ripeness prematurely in
point of time. A certain amount of acid is necessary to impart flavor
and insure good keeping qualities, hence more of it is required in
hot weather than in cold, as a defense against high temperature.
Many think that as soon as the hot days are passed the need of an
advanced curd maturity is passed also, and make almost sweet cheese.
If there is any thing that is fraught with dire consequences in
cheese making, it is extremes practiced in the _modus operandi_.
Avoid anything so derogatory and let conservatism characterize your
movements. Despite seasons and weather, and climate, we have got to
apply just so much acid to cheese to make it palatable and mellow,
and if the product is liable to encounter crucial weather enough more
sourness to retain the flavor established is imperative. But what
weakens fall goods is that in decreasing the acid scale in view of
cold weather ahead the retrograde is pushed beyond its own needs
and infringes on the quality of the cheese. In their zeal to have
the standard just right, I have known old makers to produce a lot
of weak October cheese before they realized where the trouble was.
Better have a little fullness of acid on fall stock than not enough.
“Doctor, why is it that you always buy a late fall cheese for winter
family use?” was asked one of the medical fraternity by a factory
employee as he delivered a forty pounder at his door. “We have in
my estimation far better goods on the shelves made in August and
September, and the price is the same.” “Well, you see, young man,”
said the Doctor, pouring some quinine into a vial, “I have a notion
that late fall cheese is healthier; the milk is no richer, perhaps,
than in September but the air is cool and pure, and, of course, you
know what a debilitating effect heat waves and miasmatic atmospheric
currents have on milk. Well, the less poison there is in the air,
the less there will be in the milk and subsequently in the cheese,
consequently my choice.” I believe the man of pills argued in the
right direction there, but then there is happily a way of expunging
from the curd infections absorbed by the milk from the atmosphere,
namely, airing.

The most diabolical enemy of October cheese is the skimmer. In
factories where that is unused there is a clear field for developing
fine stock, but there is no concealing the fact that all attempts to
smooth over the impoverishing effects of its use by the most skilled
treatment are futile and unavailing. If all of the good endeavor
to make mellow, rich cheese out of substance that is but dross was
expended in divorcing the illegitimate union of creamery and cheese
factory, incalculable benefit would accrue to dairy interests.

This month avoid cold draughts through the make-room during the
scalding process, as a vat presents a large surface for a current
of air to exert a chilling effect upon. Be sure and cook the curd
enough. There is a vast amount of fall made cheese that comes to
grief through insufficient scalding. If you do not bake a loaf of
bread thoroughly, you have a doughy and unpalatable article of food,
and if curd is not cooked until it has passed the raw state, it
will retain a certain quantity of whey and damage the product on
the shelves. This is the cause of strong-flavored, flabby-textured
cheese. A gentleman of long experience in the trade has said: “The
truth is, as it is difficult to cure cheese in cold weather, it ought
to be cooked more than will answer in hot weather, and sour less, as
the tendency is to acidulation in a cool atmosphere, in consequence
of the moisture not drying out soon enough.” To this we can append
the suggestion of never trying to cure a cheese in a cool atmosphere,
for the result will be a failure. A cheese cannot help but grow old
in a cold room but it will never cure.




A SIGNIFICANT REPORT.


A recent issue of the Utica _Herald_ contains the following:

  A New York gentleman, who has recently returned from Liverpool,
  writes to a friend in this city and reports the situation healthy
  on the other side, but says New York State cheese are done for
  as far as fine cheese goes. It is the same old trouble we have
  mentioned time and again, too much cheese to the pound of milk—no
  body. Canada, and even New Zealand, are taking the trade of fine
  cheese from the States. Our factory men will wake up to the fact
  some day and find their goods are only second class. In fact, it is
  about so now. New York State cheese sell under Canada all the way
  from ½ @ 1c. a pound. We have preached this a long while but it is
  beginning to be realized now. This accounts for the large shipments
  from Canada during the last two months, and the small ones from
  here.

Cheese industry is not yet of sufficient magnitude to exert any
marked influence on the European markets, but as the dairy industry
is constantly expanding here, and the State’s product must stand on
its own merits, it behooves manufacturers to avoid the pit that their
brothers of the Empire State have inadvertently stumbled into. We
consume a large amount of cheese here at home, and why are not our
stomachs as worthy to be catered to as are the digestive receptacles
of our English cousins across the pond? Yet there is no alarm in
cheese circles as to deteriorated quality until British buyers find
something that suits them better and for which they are willing to
pay more. Truly cheese-eating New Yorkers are a very patient people.
We have before us the file of a leading American cheese report of
1868—twenty years ago. It says: “We are behind the Canadians as
regards firmness, but ahead of them in point of flavor. The same
relation exists between American and Swedish cheese; also, between
American and English cheese, and other European makes, with the
exception of a few of the best English brands, which are equal if
not superior to our finest grades, as regards flavor, and superior
in fineness and firmness of texture.” This was America’s prestige
a score of years ago. Why has it not been sustained? The cause is
clear to the most obdurate. Producers supposed their cheese supreme
in the English markets and have been abusing an established trade
reputation with impunity. Their folly is now apparent, and the
question naturally arises, Will they play the role of the prodigal
son and return to a path of trade rectitude? That implies that the
banns that unite the creamery and the cheese factory be irrevocably
severed—send the skimmer higher than Gilroy’s kite, as it were.
The American people can appreciate good cheese just as well as the
English. We want good butter, too, but not at the cost of the cheese
quality. That is not necessary, and a few years ago we did not deem
it so, either. Why should there be a tendency in that direction
now? We are now better equipped in every department to send out
better cheese than we did in 1868, yet notice the difference in the
two reports quoted. We are better equipped, because we have more
scientific appliances for handling milk. Our milk is better, because
the pastures are improved, and a finer grade of stock feeds upon
them. Makers of to-day who rely on the accumulated cheese wisdom
handed down through two decades of experience should be rich enough
in knowledge to at least not retrograde from the standard of 1868.
Let us for one moment lay reform in the tariff, and reform in the
civil service on the table and talk, think and act about reform in
cheese. Michigan always takes a front seat when reformation of any
kind is agitated. We are satisfied she will not take a back seat
now. There has probably not been such a tendency in this State as in
other localities to rob milk at both ends and on the sides before
it is suffered to coagulate in cheese, but let us smother what
infection there is before it becomes an established blight on the
Wolverine product. We are satisfied that our dairymen are alive to
their interests here, and will not drift away from safe anchorage. A
shipping cheese requires more body, or, in other words, more acid and
firmness than a cheese designed for home consumption. This is partly
due to the fact that such a quality is demanded by European consumers
and partly because an ocean voyage necessitates it. It takes more
milk to make such cheese, and less milk to produce the softer and
more perishable home trade goods. In thrusting the cheaper article on
the foreign market, New Yorkers have staked a hazardous venture and
lost. Nothing is said about the skimmer, but it gets in its insidious
work all the same—not under full cream brands, probably. We do not
insinuate that, but the markets are crowded with night and flat
skims, occupying space that should be filled with richer goods. Skims
are sent over to England when they really want full cream. Canada and
New Zealand step in with a fine quality of the latter brand, and
they take it even in preference to the States’ best offering. We hold
skimmed cheese greatly responsible for the trade depression under
which the American article is now laboring. It is high time that the
dry, hard stuff was known no more in all the earth.




PREPARED RENNET AND COLOR.


The value to the cheese trade of scientifically prepared rennet and
annotto color cannot be over estimated. Rennet extract, and one
quality annottoine, are not in general use, but they should be. With
the home prepared infusion of both articles, we have a thousand
diverse shades of quality and degrees of strength, and, worst of
all, they are often applied to the milk, hit or miss. The result is
unevenness in cheese quality and color, where there should be perfect
uniformity. We advise all makers to renounce as fast as practicable
the old, often unsatisfactory method of soaking rennet skins, and
steeping annotto seed, and adopt reliably prepared extracts of these
essential cheese ingredients.




CHEESE THAT HUFF.


A good, properly manufactured cheese will never huff up on the
surface, or swell the bandage to the point of protuberance. Cheese
often huff slightly when curing, and afterward flatten into a
smooth, firm surface, but they are never No. 1 stock. The writer can
remember fifteen years back when makers did not understand working
gaseous curds as they do now. Sales and shipments were far between
then, and cheese accumulated in great numbers in factories. It was
no uncommon thing in the years ’73 and ’74, in passing through a
curing room containing 500 or 600 cheese, to find a large percentage
of the umber covered with immense blisters, that held in retention
offensive smelling gases. Every day the maker would lance these
unhealthy swellings with a wire or goose quill, only to have them
shortly after bulge out in another place. Besides these partially
affected cheese, there were often days’ makes of those that would
huff all over, swell out like huge puff balls till a slight jar
would have rolled them from the shelves. These were the product of
floating curds with the gas all left in. A decade and a half ago
farmers did not take the same care of their milk that they do now.
They were not versed in dairy literature to any extent, and did not
see the importance of speedily expelling animal heat from milk or of
always furnishing their cows with wholesome drinking water. Hence,
tainted milk was more often the rule than the exception. With the
present bettered quality of milk and the improved skill of makers in
handling it, inflative cheese ought to now be foreign to the curing
room. Bad taints are at present seldom met with, but slight ones
creep in unawares, unless the maker is vigilant, and then it is his
business to eradicate the ill-savor. Sour until acid has completely
overcome the gas, grind twice, and give the curd a prolonged airing
by frequent stirring. Try the prolonged stirring on common curds that
are hot—too hot to go immediately to press—and notice how it will
enhance the flavor of the cheese.




FACTORY UTENSILS.


As a maker, I have had opportunities of seeing milk in all stages and
in all conditions, and I have found it an invariable rule that the
milk furnished by farmers who read and studied the dairy question
in all of its phases; who were conversant with dairy literature and
adopted the most improved methods extant for producing an abundant,
pure and rich flow of milk, were enough affected by the ideas
absorbed from library and press to be unconsciously moulded by their
influence. On the other hand, farmers who never read; who avoided
all progressive methods as “new-fangled notions” and clung to the
primitive ways of their ancestors, forgetful that those ancestors
adopted nothing new because there was no new thing to adopt,
furnished milk sometimes good, often poor, and never profitable to
themselves. A man who doesn’t have an opinion on the relative value
of milch breeds, who doesn’t know how to feed scientifically and who
has narrow conceptions of systematic dairying, generally is, in this
competitive epoch, an agricultural cipher.

The other day the writer inspected two cheese factories, separated
by only a few miles, each being located on admirable sites and
accessible to water. Previous to my visit I had been told that the
maker in B——’s factory had, during the past season, produced poor,
uneven stock, which was a surprise to his friends, as his trade
reputation was excellent. On the other hand, I knew that the cheese
from W——’s factory, although manufactured by a man of less experience
than his rival, had sold at prices above the former’s and footed up
a lower ratio. As soon as I had seen the interior of each building
the sequel was made plain to me, and subsequent investigation proved
it. The first named factory was a mere shell, furnished with utensils
both primitive and worn out; the second was a tight, plastered
structure and equipped with all of the paraphernalia essential to
a modern cheese building. The competition was like running a pony
express against a United States mail train.

A cheese factory needs good, improved utensils, just the same as a
farm requires machinery of the latest patterns. It should have a
boiler, because steam heating is cheaper, more under control and,
consequently, safer for scalding than where fire under heating is
employed. It should be furnished with a curd mill, because with one
the maker has the acid almost completely under control. Without
a mill, the whey must be retained until nearly enough acid has
developed to meet the requisite gauge. Then it must be hastily drawn
and hastily salted, with the whey not all out of it; too often the
acid is in advance of the maker’s expectations. Cheese made in this
way from day to day cannot help but be uneven in flavor, in salt and
in acid. “Salting in the whey,” as it is called, without a mill is
wasteful, too. As the whey flows off, the constant tendency of the
curd is to pack, and hand manipulation to prevent this will start
white whey, the life blood of the cheese, in wasteful quantities.
With a mill to use, all this is changed. The whey can be drawn when
but very little acid has appeared, and the curd, packed and drained,
waits for the sourness to develop there. It matures more slowly than
when submerged in whey, and when the right point is reached the iron
teeth of the mill attack it and tear it up and salt it when in a _dry
state_, which is a great advantage. The make-room should be supplied
with a gang press and patent hoops, because one screw will compress a
dozen cheese and solidify them more firmly than old fashioned single
screws. A good cheese can be spoiled after it is in the hoop by
insufficient pressing.

I consider the latest milk handling devices almost as essential
in a modern factory or creamery as the practical knowledge of the
maker. Not merely for labor saving purposes should manufactories be
so supplied, but because the demands of present trade require dairy
products of a complexion difficult to attain without. It is a “penny
wise and pound foolish” policy to scantily furnish a butter or cheese
plant when thereby the loss on one under price sale would have more
than covered the deficiency in tools.




TO CHEESE MAKERS.


The main point why Canadian cheese is lately quoted higher than
American is that they are ahead of us =on uniformity=. To obtain this
a uniform Rennet and a uniform Color are most essential. No matter
how careful the maker is, he can never get it as uniform as our


  Chr. Hansen’s Rennet Extract

  ——AND——

  CHEESE COLOR.

Taking into account the poor Rennets in the market, the saving by
making your own Extract is very small; and as to Cheese Color, even
if you did save 60 cents a gallon it would only cost you =5 cents
more to color 1000 pounds of cheese=, a mere nothing if ours is
at all more uniform and of a more natural shade, =bright, clean,
creamy=, and not dull reddish.

Consider this, and give our Extract and Color a fair trial.

If you prefer Rennet in dry shape try our Rennet Tablets, which are
quite as cheap and a great deal handier to use than powder.

Send for Price List to


  CHR. HANSEN’S LABORATORY,
  (Little Falls, N. Y.,) or
  17 Dearborn Street,       CHICAGO, ILL.

  J. D. FREDERIKSEN, ESQ.,       BROCKVILLE, Ont., July 17, 1886.

  CHR. HANSEN’S LABORATORY, LITTLE FALLS, N. Y.:

  _Dear Sir_—Your Rennet and Color are positively the finest
  that have ever been introduced into this section. I know this
  personally. Our cheese are finer this year than ever before in
  consequence of using those goods.

  Yours respectfully,
  D. DERBYSHIRE, Pres’t E. O. D. A.




  CREAMERY, CHEESE FACTORY AND
  DAIRY

  MACHINERY AND SUPPLIES.

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  D. H. ROE & CO.,

  CHICAGO, ILL.,

  CARRY A FULL LINE OF ALL KINDS OF SUPPLIES, SUCH AS

  Butter Cloth, Cheese Cloth, Cloth Circles,

  RENNETS,

  RENNET EXTRACT, RENNET TABLETS, CHEESE
  COLOR, BUTTER COLOR, CHEESE GREASE,
  SALT, BUTTER TUBS, CHEESE
  BOXES, CHEESE BOX
  STOCK, &c., &c.

  ALSO A FULL LINE OF

  Cream Vats, Milk Vats, Self Heating Vats, Churns,
  Steam Boilers, Steam Engines, Separators,
  Cheese Presses, Butter Printers,
  Etc., Etc., Etc.

  Send for Price List, and mention the “Hand-Book.”

[Illustration: Barrels]

Acknowledged to be the only proper CHEESE DRESSING on the market.

  _Manufactured only by_ =B. J. JOHNSON & CO.,
  MILWAUKEE, WIS.=




THE MICHIGAN DAIRYMAN.

_Official Organ of the Michigan Dairyman’s Association._

50 CENTS PER YEAR IN ADVANCE.

_Sample Copies sent Free._


  _Address the Publishers_,
  E. A. STOWE & BRO.,
  Grand Rapids,       Michigan.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 12 Changed: the whole mass is preceptibly
             to: the whole mass is perceptibly

  pg 15 Changed: been thoroughly agitated vithout bruising
             to: been thoroughly agitated without bruising

  pg 16 Changed: slightly (perpaps in five minutes
             to: slightly (perhaps in five minutes

  pg 17 Changed: sure test of which I are aware
             to: sure test of which I am aware

  pg 19 Changed: A maker who can preceive
             to: A maker who can perceive

  pg 20 Changed: expel heat as to expugn the gaseous odors
             to: expel heat as to expunge the gaseous odors

  pg 21 Changed: tht last thing stirring up the surface
             to: that last thing stirring up the surface

  pg 33 Changed: the rennet or gastic juice it contains
             to: the rennet or gastric juice it contains

  pg 34 Changed: been secreted in their mammilary glands
             to: been secreted in their mammillary glands

  pg 35 Changed: seat on the bench of humilation
             to: seat on the bench of humiliation

  pg 36 Changed: inexorably exacts from the physicial
             to: inexorably exacts from the physical

  pg 37 Changed: As all patirons are served
             to: As all patrons are served

  pg 39 Changed: lengthway to lengthways (two times)

  pg 45 Changed: afraid af financially losing
             to: afraid of financially losing

  pg 52 Changed: a way of expugning from the curd
             to: a way of expunging from the curd

  pg 52 Changed: benefit would accrue to dairy interetes
             to: benefit would accrue to dairy interests

  pg 55 Changed: scientific appliances for handling miik
             to: scientific appliances for handling milk

  pg 55 Changed: before it becomes an establisted
             to: before it becomes an established

  pg 58 Changed: who does’t know how to feed scientifically
             to: who doesn’t know how to feed scientifically



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND-BOOK ON CHEESE MAKING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hints on cheese-making, for the dairyman, the factoryman, and the manufacturer
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hints on cheese-making, for the dairyman, the factoryman, and the manufacturer

Author: T. D. Curtis

Release date: July 27, 2013 [eBook #43323]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Mark C. Orton, Martin Pettit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HINTS ON CHEESE-MAKING, FOR THE DAIRYMAN, THE FACTORYMAN, AND THE MANUFACTURER ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






HINTS ON CHEESE-MAKING,

FOR THE

DAIRYMAN, THE FACTORYMAN,

AND THE MANUFACTURER.

BY T. D. CURTIS.

UTICA, N. Y.

ROBERTS, PRINTER, MORNING HERALD ESTABLISHMENT.

1870.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by

THOMAS DAY CURTIS,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Northern District of
New York.




INTRODUCTORY.


The following pages comprise the series of articles which appeared,
during the last season, in the columns of the UTICA MORNING and WEEKLY
HERALD. It is not claimed that they exhaust the several questions
discussed; but it is believed that they constitute the most practical
treatise on cheese-making that has yet appeared, and that they embrace
the leading features and indicate the more advanced methods of the art
as practiced by the best manufacturers. Every experienced cheese-maker
may find something in them to object to and criticise, as there is
diversity of opinion on many, as yet, not definitely settled questions.
The writer would not check honest and intelligent criticism, if he
could, but, on the contrary, encourage it. Nor would he have others
adopt any of the suggestions, methods or practices herein mentioned, if
they think they have better of their own. He would rather stimulate
independent thought and action, and urge each to observe closely,
experiment thoroughly, and be guided by his own experience. Beginners,
without a complete knowledge of all the branches of cheese-making, it is
believed, will be able to glean from these pages what will afford
valuable assistance to them; but they should accept nothing as
conclusive. There is much to be discovered and learned about
cheese-making. Those who have worked at the business for years, without
material progress, are not as likely to make important discoveries or
improvements as those who now or may hereafter come to a knowledge of
the subject with fresh minds and faculties newly stimulated. They will
begin where the old cheese-makers leave off, and ought to be able to
make advances in the work thus far developed by their predecessors. That
each may keep his wits about him and add something valuable to our
present stock of knowledge in regard to cheese-making, is the earnest
wish of

THE AUTHOR.

UTICA, January, 1870.




CONTENTS.

                              PAGE.
INTRODUCTORY,                     5

BUILDING CHEESE FACTORIES,        9

PRODUCTION OF MILK,              14

COMPOSITION OF MILK,             18

TAINTS AND ODORS,                23

COOLING MILK,                    27

DELIVERING MILK,                 31

RECEIVING MILK,                  36

BIG AVERAGES,                    40

CONDUCTORS, STRAINERS, &C.,      45

COLOR,                           49

RENNETS,                         55

PREPARING RENNET,                60

SETTING,                         64

CUTTING CURDS,                   68

HEAT,                            73

ACID,                            79

DIPPING CURDS,                   84

SALTING CURDS,                   87

TAINTED MILK,                    91

CURING,                          93

GREASING CHEESE,                 95

SKIPPERS,                        99

CHEDDAR PROCESS,                102




HINTS ON CHEESE-MAKING.




CHAPTER I.

BUILDING CHEESE-FACTORIES.


We frequently receive inquiries from parties who contemplate building
cheese-factories, regarding certain details which none but those who
have actual experience can readily carry out. For the benefit of all
needing such information, we have taken pains to prepare the following:

Small or medium-sized factories now seem to be in order. People do not
like to carry milk long distances, and this fact undoubtedly accounts
for the tendency to small factories, conveniently located. We will give
the size of a building suitable for a dairy of 300 to 500 cows. Let it
be 80 by 26 feet, with 16 feet posts and two floors. From one end of the
lower story take 24 feet for a make room, leaving the remainder for a
curing room. Should more than one vat be used, the make room will need
to be about six feet larger one way. It may be made so by taking the
space off from the curing room, or by putting a projection on the side.
The upper story will be used for curing, but should be partitioned off
the same as the lower story. The room over the make room should be
lathed and plastered, and provided with heating apparatus, so as to make
a suitable place for curing early and late made cheese. The building may
be cheap, or as expensive as desired.

Either setters and ranges, or the old style tables, may be used. The
latter, since small-sized cheeses have come in fashion, are the more
common. They are quite as cheap and convenient, and by using them,
factorymen avoid the annoyance consequent upon the pretended patent
right which is claimed on the rails and turners.

We shall not recommend any particular style of vat, since by doing so we
should seem to condemn others. But we will mention the fact that for
small factories, vats with self-heaters are preferable and the more
economical. A self-heater can be set up and run anywhere, with a piece
of stove-pipe to conduct off the smoke, and the expense of boilers,
mason-work, etc., is avoided. Five or six cords of maple stove-wood,
split fine and well seasoned, will run a good self-heater through the
season.

The appearance of a dairy depends very much on the trueness, as well as
uniformity in hight, of the cheeses. Good presses and hoops are
therefore essential, and save a great deal of trouble as well as give a
great deal of satisfaction. The press, therefore, needs to be made heavy
and strong, so as not to spring or warp. Let the sill be 14 by 4 inches;
the beam, 10 by 6 inches; posts, 4 by 14 inches, slanted from the sill
upward to 10, the width of the beam. The sill and beam should be boxed
into the posts three-fourths of an inch, and the posts should extend
above the beam some 4 inches or more. The top of the sill should stand
about 2 feet from the floor. The space between the sill and beam should
be 2 feet 4 inches. The lateral space allowed for each hoop should be 2
feet; and in each space between the hoops the sill and beam should be
held in place by seven-eighths inch rods of iron. In the first space
from either end, a single rod is sufficient; the next should have two
rods, and so on, alternately. The single rod should extend through the
middle of the sill and beam, and have heavy washers attached to each
end, to prevent the head or nut from settling into the wood. The double
rods should go through the edges of the beam and sill, and through heavy
washers of iron on the bottom of the sill, and through strong straps
extending across the top of the beam. The presses should be made for
pressing four or six cheeses, and be made of hard, seasoned timber. The
screws should be 1¾ inch. Of the various kinds of screws introduced, we
know of none better than the old-fashioned ones, with holes through them
to receive the bar.

The curd-sink is an important thing in a factory. Its construction is
always a matter of considerable speculation and perplexity. We will give
dimensions for one suitable for a factory of the size we have indicated.
It should be 16 feet long, 2 feet 10 inches in width inside, and 1 foot
deep. The bottom should be 1½ inch thick, and the sides 1 inch thick.
The legs should be 3 feet high, extending up the sides, so that the top
of the sink will be 3 feet from the floor. The sink should be made of
clear, seasoned pine, and the legs be well braced, with cross and side
pieces connecting them about 6 inches from the floor. Backs and a cloth
strainer may be used, or a false bottom with perforated tin strainers
may be substituted.

The proper hight of the weighing can, of the dumping window from the
ground, and the best apparatus for unloading, are generally matters
quite perplexing. The proper hight of the receiving can is that which
gives a gentle slope to the conductor, as too much current not only
causes the milk to slop over the sides of the strainer, but drives the
dirt through the strainer. With vats 3 feet 2 inches high, the platform
for the scales should be 3 feet 8 inches from the floor.

Of the many appliances used for unloading, none is simpler, cheaper or
more satisfactory than the crane. Make it of scantling 4 by 4 inches,
the upright 8 feet long, and the arm 7 feet. Hang it as you would a
barn-door. Fasten one end of a strong half or three-quarter inch rope to
the end of the arm; run it through a pully to which is attached the
tongs; then over a 4 inch pully above, near the end of the arm; run it
back over a similar pully next to the upright, then down to a 3 inch
roller, with a crank, at a convenient hight for turning. One end of the
crank must be sustained by a strong iron strap, bowing outward, in the
direction of the arm, to admit the roller (about 6 inches long)
lengthwise, and fastened to the upright above and below.

The window-sill should be not more than two or three inches above the
edge of the receiving-can, which should stand close to the window, just
clearing the sill. The road should be eighteen inches below the platform
on which stand the scales and weighing can. Then the can, when raised
just enough to clear the wagon-box and wheels, will be of the right
hight for dumping when swung round to the window. Many make the mistake
of getting the road too low, which causes the unnecessary work of
raising the milk 3 or 4 feet by hand before it can be dumped, and wastes
strength and time, both in raising the can and lowering it back again
into the wagon after it is emptied.

In building a factory, every provision should be made for cleanliness.
It should be located near a living spring of water, ranging in
temperature somewhere between 45° and 55°. There should be sufficient
water to fill, at all times, an inch pipe, and care should be taken to
secure a fair head--enough to carry the water above the vats, at least.
The water should be carried in pipes under the building, along by the
ends of the vats where it is wanted, with penstocks rising from the
pipe, to furnish water for each vat. The faucets in the penstocks should
be all of the same hight--if any difference is made, the one farthest
from the head might be a quarter or half an inch the lowest. Outside
should be a penstock, to carry off the superfluous water. The outlet to
this should be a few inches higher than the faucets in the penstocks for
supplying the vats with water. This is necessary to secure a flow of
water in the factory. In freezing weather, and during the winter, the
penstocks in the factory can be removed, until needed for use, and the
holes in the pipe beneath plugged up. An extra faucet in one of the
penstocks at the ends of the vats, inserted high enough from the floor
to set a pail under, will supply all the necessary water for cleaning
and other purposes.




CHAPTER II.

PRODUCTION OF MILK.


The requisites of good milk have been so frequently and fully discussed,
that we need not more than briefly advert to them now. The importance of
good milk, for either cheese or butter, will be conceded, and therefore
the question need not be argued.

The first requisites of good milk are good cows. But these will
disappoint their owners if they have not good keep. Plenty of good clean
hay and pure water, with warm quarters, are indispensable. The
old-fashioned method of allowing cows, or other cattle, to weather all
kinds of storms, with a snow-bank for a bed at night, we believe is
pretty effectually done away with. It has been found that it does not
pay. It is not yet quite so universally admitted that generous feeding
is equally advantageous, nor that a warm stable is as much an advance on
an open, cold one, where the cows stand and shiver throughout the
twenty-four hours, as a common shelter is an improvement on no shelter.
Yet, a warm stable, which may be had for a small expense, is decided
economy, in the saving of food, as well as a comfort to the cows; and
generous feeding will be found a profitable investment, both by the
increased flow of milk and by its increased richness. A poorly-kept cow
will give less milk than a well-kept one, and its poorer quality will be
more manifest than the diminution in quantity. When turned out to grass,
if the feed should prove good, it will take the cow weeks to build up
her system and get in the condition she should have been in at the
start; and though the quantity and quality of her milk will improve,
she will reach the time when the mess naturally begins to shrink before
she will have thoroughly recuperated. After this, the richness of the
milk will probably be satisfactory. But in case the season should open
dry and cold, so that the grass starts slowly, and is then followed by
the hot dry weather of July and August, as is not unfrequently the case,
a cow that starts "spring poor" will scarcely get in good condition
before the grass is nipped by the fall frosts and it becomes necessary
to begin to fodder.

There is a marked difference in the quality of the messes of milk
delivered at a cheese-factory. The use of the lactometer and
cream-gauges will show this. It will be an interesting experiment, for
cheese-makers who never tried it, to test in this way the quality of the
milk delivered by the different patrons, and then ascertain the style in
which each keeps his cows, the character of the pastures of each, the
kind of water which the pastures afford--whether brook, river, swamp or
spring--and to note any other facts and conditions which may be apparent
or may suggest themselves. It will be found, we think, that bad
wintering and poor pastures have as much or more to do than anything
else with the production of poor milk. No breed of cows nor selection of
a dairy can wholly counteract these evils. The yield of milk will
undoubtedly be greater and better with some cows than with others; and
so with naturally good cows, good wintering and pasturing will show
quite as marked improvements.

We have in our mind an instance where, at the opening of a
cheese-factory, only a few of the farmers, having the largest dairies,
delivered milk. They were all men who fed their cows well during the
winter, and gave them meal before and after coming in. The result was
an astonishingly large yield of cheese from milk at that season of the
year. But as the messes increased, and milk from dairies poorly-kept
came in, the yield of cheese in proportion to the number of pounds of
milk steadily diminished. The lactometer and cream-gauges showed that
the poorest milk came from the poorest-kept cows.

The forepart of the season proved a cold and wet one, which made the
grass more juicy and less nutritious. This, with the accidental or
intentional watering which the milk got from the rain falling in the
cans, either at home or on the road, was also believed to decrease the
yield of cheese. It appeared that milk coming long distances through the
rain, other things being equal, showed more water than that brought
short distances. Manifestly, some sort of shelter to the cans should be
devised, to be used both at home and on the road, during rainy
weather--and the same for keeping off the rays of the sun, in fair
weather, is equally desirable.

All through the season, in the instance referred to, there was a marked
difference in the quality of the milk of the well-kept and of the
poorly-kept dairies. Swampy pastures also seemed to impoverish the milk.
Those pastures that were dry, with pure water accessible, appeared to
produce the richest milk. While the milk of the best dairies, on being
tested, would indicate a yield of a pound of cheese to eight or nine
pounds of milk, the milk of others would not yield a pound of cheese to
less than eleven or twelve pounds of milk. The average number of pounds
of milk for a pound of cheese, during the season, was about 9.9.

In the foregoing, will be seen a manifest objection to the factory
system, as at present conducted. The quality of the milk delivered is
nowhere taken into consideration. The man who has a well-selected dairy,
keeps it well, and delivers milk that will turn out, for the season, a
hundred pounds of cheese for every nine hundred pounds of milk, gets no
more returns for a given number of pounds of milk than the man who
delivers milk so poor that twelve hundred pounds of it will not make
more than a hundred pounds of cheese, or the same as the former's nine
hundred pounds. There is a difference of about twenty-five per cent, in
the quality of the milk turned out by the good and the poor dairies,
one-half of which the owner of the former loses, and the other half of
which the owner of the latter gains, by getting his milk made up at the
factory. Some means should be devised for remedying this piece of
injustice, if the better class of dairies is to be retained by the
factories.




CHAPTER III.

COMPOSITION OF MILK.


The composition of milk, though frequently discussed, is not generally
well understood. It is quite variable, not only in the milk from
different cows, but in that from the same cow at different times, and in
different conditions, but especially at different seasons of the year.
It is more buttery in winter, and more cheesy in summer. A cow milked
three times a day would give more in quantity but poorer in quality,
than if milked twice; while one milked twice a day will yield more milk
than if milked once a day, but one milking a day would be the richer.
The first milk drawn from the udder is more watery than what follows;
the last is the richest. The accumulation of milk in the cow's bag is
influenced by the law of gravitation. The water being the heaviest
ingredient, settles to the bottom, and is the first milked; the cream,
which is the lightest, rises, and is the last milked. That is to say, a
partial separation takes place in the udder, sufficient to make the
"strippings" some ten or twelve times as rich in butter as the first
milk drawn. We would, therefore, infer that the first third contains the
most water, the second third the most cheese, and the last third the
most butter. There is said to be a difference in the milk drawn from the
compartments of the udder of the same cow, or from different teats.

The variation in the composition of milk, of course, is indicated by
different chemical analyses, no two of which can be found to exactly
agree. We give an analysis by HAIDLEN. He found that the specimen
contained, in 1,000 parts, 873 parts of water, 30 of butter, 48.2 of
cheese, 43.9 of sugar of milk, 2.31 of phosphate of lime, .42 of
magnesia, .47 of iron, 1.04 of chloride of potassium, and .66 of sodium
and soda. Other chemists have found albumen among the constituents of
milk, and this ingredient is believed, by many, to be the one that first
commences decaying, in hot weather, and produces, "tainted" milk,
"floating" curds, and "huffy" cheese. Skimmed milk has been found, in
some instances, to contain as high as 97 parts of water in 100, and only
3 per cent. of solids, or cheesy matter. "Swill milk" has been found to
contain as low as 1½ per cent. of butter. An analysis of the first milk
taken from a cow's bag after calving, showed it to consist of 15.1 per
cent. of caseine, or cheese, 2.6 of butter, 2 of mucous matter, and 80.3
of water. Ordinary pure milk will average about 12½ per cent. of cream.
But it is not unfrequently found to yield 15 to 20 per cent., and even
as high as 25 per cent. of cream has been obtained. If milk yields less
than 10 per cent. of cream, it is below the average, and unprofitable
for butter-making.

We know of no single instrument that will at once indicate the quality
of milk. What is called the lactometer, but is properly a hydrometer,
will indicate the density of milk, and if its specific gravity in a pure
state be known, it will show the amount of water added, if any. On an
average, milk is about 4 per cent. heavier than water. That is, a
hydrometer with a scale graded at 100 for milk at 60° Farenheit, ought
to sink to 96 in water. The variation in the density of milk will be
shown by an experiment given by CHARLES L. FLINT, in his "Milch Cows and
Dairy Farming." He says:

"For the purpose of showing the difference in the specific gravity of
different specimens of pure milk, taken from the cows in the morning,
and allowed to cool down to about 60°, I used an instrument graduated
with the pure milk mark at 100, with the following results: The first
pint drawn from a native cow stood at 101. The last pint of the same
milking, being the strippings of the same cow, stood at 86. The mixture
of the two pints stood at about 93½. The milk of a pure bred Jersey
stood at 95, that of an Ayrshire at 100, that of a Hereford at 106, that
of a Devon at 111, while a thin cream stood at 66. All these specimens
of milk were pure, and milked at the same time in the morning, carefully
labeled in separate vessels, and set upon the same shelf to cool off;
and yet the variations of specific gravity amounted to 25, or, taking
the average quality of the native cow's milk at 93½, the variations
amounted to 17½."

It will be seen, by these experiments, that the richer the milk in
butter, the less the specific gravity, thin cream being 30° below the
water mark. The richer the milk in caseine, or cheese, the greater the
specific gravity, the milk of the Devon indicating 15° above the water
mark. Watering milk will of course reduce the specific gravity of milk
rich in cheese, and by this means it can be made to indicate the average
density of pure milk. In the same way, milk rich in butter may have its
specific gravity increased until it nearly reaches that of water, but no
amount of watering can make it indicate over 96°, which is the figure
given for pure water. A little salt, or other ingredient, may be added
to bring the density up to the pure milk mark. So the blueness of milk,
produced by either skimming or watering, may be removed by the use of
burnt sugar, which will give it a rich color. Or annotto may be used
for the same purpose. Many expedients have been resorted to, from time
to time, by the dishonest, for the purpose of disguising the
impoverishment of milk by skimming and watering.

"But," says some one, "why tell dishonest men how they can skim and
adulterate their milk?" We have not done so. We have told honest men
some of the practices of the dishonest, with the view of enabling them
to detect the fraud. True, the hydrometer is not an accurate or legal
test; but it shows the exact density of the milk tried, and this is a
very important point. When you have decided this, by the use of the
cream-gauges, you can determine the amount of cream; and if you let the
milk stand until it coagulates, and the cheese separates from the whey,
you can tell the relative proportion of water and cheese. This may be a
somewhat slow and clumsy process, but it is nevertheless decisive, and
often repays the trouble. Foreign substances, so far as not held in
solution by the water, or not entangled in the cheese or cream, will
settle at the bottom of the glasses. Besides, with these evidences to
start on, the ways of a suspected person can be watched, and he often be
caught in the very act of violating the law, which we quote below:


     § 1. Whoever shall knowingly sell, supply, or bring to be
     manufactured to any cheese manufactory in this State, any milk
     diluted with water, or in any way adulterated, or milk from which
     any cream has been taken, or milk commonly known as skimmed milk;
     or whoever shall keep back any part of the milk known as
     "strippings;" or whoever shall knowingly bring or supply milk to
     any cheese manufactory that is tainted or partly sour from want of
     proper care in keeping pails, strainers, or any vessel in which
     said milk is kept, clean and sweet, after being notified of such
     taint or carelessness; or any cheese manufacturer who shall
     knowingly use, or direct any of his employes to use, for his or
     their individual benefit, any cream from the milk brought to said
     cheese manufacturer, without the consent of all the owners thereof,
     shall, for each and every offense, forfeit and pay a sum not less
     than twenty-five dollars, nor more than one hundred dollars, with
     costs of suit, to be sued for in any court of competent
     jurisdiction, for the benefit of the person or persons, firm or
     association or corporation, or their assigns, upon whom such fraud
     be committed.




CHAPTER IV.

TAINTS AND ODORS.


Whatever be the grade of cows and the quality of milk, much depends upon
its management. A good deal of care and attention are requisite for the
attainment of the best possible results with such milk as we may have to
work up. But before we come to the process of milking, let us look a
moment at the effect of food in regard to taints and the flavor of milk.

It is now universally conceded, that the flavor as well as the quality
of the milk depends very materially upon the food of the cow. Coarse
swamp-grasses and weeds do not produce as rich or sweet milk as clover,
timothy and red-top, grown on dry upland soil; while swamp-water gives a
ranker flavor than the sweet spring and brook-water of hilly regions.
Leeks are not the only weeds which taint the milk before it is taken
from the cow. All rank vegetable growths lend a similar influence to
injure flavor. Indeed, that which the cow eats is what she makes the
milk of, and if these offensive things are taken into her system, she
cannot be expected to turn out milk that will not partake of their
qualities, any more than a man can be expected to make sweet cider of
sour apples by running them through the mill and press. Even the
atmosphere which the cows breathe affects the flavor of the milk.
Carrion in the lot where the cows feed has been known to impart its odor
to the milk of the dairy. Dirty stables and barnyards, the odor of which
is breathed by the cows, makes the milk "taste of the barnyard," as the
common expression goes.

It becomes of the greatest importance, therefore, that cows should have
clean, sweet pastures to feed in, and clear spring or brook-water to
drink; also, that they should have clean, well-ventilated stables to
stand in, and be milked in clean yards or stables, as free from all
taints and bad odors as possible. The cows should not be heated by
hurried driving with a dog, or by a man or boy on horseback, as this
fevers the milk, giving it an unwholesome quality, leading to rapid
decay as well as producing bad flavor.

And, if quantity as well as quality is to be attained, pastures must
contain plenty of feed, so that the cow can soon fill her stomach and
then lie down or stand in the shade and ruminate at ease, instead of
working constantly from morning to night to gather food enough to
satisfy her. She must have water handy, instead of away back in some
retired corner of a large pasture, as she naturally wants to drink a few
swallows quite often, in warm weather, but will go until she gets
excessively dry and feverish before she will travel a long distance to
get water. When thus very dry, she drinks an inordinate quantity, which
makes her feel heavy and uncomfortable--and whatever annoys a cow
lessens the flow and reduces the quality of the milk.

A little reflection must make these things apparent to every reasoning
mind. Cows must have plenty of clean, wholesome food and pure water, and
must be every way made comfortable and contented, if the largest flow
and best quality of milk is expected. The cow is sure to show, not only
her own naturally good or bad qualities, but her keep and care, in the
milk pail. There is no cheating her. She will make a corresponding
discount or dividend on every iota of ill or good treatment she
receives. In this, she is an exact accountant, and she will insist upon
keeping the account square.

Milk requires not only favorable conditions for its production, as above
indicated, but needs great care and cleanliness after it is drawn from
the cows. A foul yard or stable will impart its odors to the milk.
Uncleanliness in milking not only gets filth into the milk, but taints
and injures its flavor. Some, for this reason, recommend washing the
cow's bag before milking. But if this washing is done with cold water by
the milker, it is quite likely to consume time, cool the bag and cause
the cow to hold up a portion of the mess. Experience shows that the
quicker the milk can be drawn, after the operation is commenced, the
better the yield. If washing is done, it should be with warm or tepid
water, and be the work of one person, who should go through the whole
dairy in advance of the milkers. But, in our opinion, where the stable
or yard is kept clean, a careful brushing of the bag with the hands
before beginning, and care in holding the pail a little toward you from
under the teats, will obviate all the evils of uncleanliness from
milking; and, certain it is, where all the surroundings are dirty, no
amount of washing the cow's bag will get rid of the bad effects of the
odors arising from the filth. Clean quarters for milking are
indispensable to the furnishing of sweet, nice-flavored milk.

Cleanliness in all the pails, cans, strainers, and whatever comes in
contact with the milk, is equally necessary. Thorough washing, not
omitting the use of soap, scalding and airing, are the only things that
will keep them sweet and free from taint. All implements and utensils
should be as free from sharp corners as possible, as these are difficult
to clean, and taints are apt to be left in them to come in contact with
the new milk and infect it, as a small quantity of yeast leavens a batch
of bread. The milk will, therefore, soon begin to ferment, producing one
of the worst conditions which the cheese-maker has to contend with, and
rendering it impossible for him to make firm, clean-flavored cheese of
the milk. In no case should wooden vessels be used for milk. The wood
will absorb the milk, and no amount of washing and scalding will get it
entirely out. What remains will get frowy and impart its infection to
the warm milk and cause it to rapidly taint. Tin vessels are the best of
anything yet devised, and are recommended universally by the best
dairymen and by the American Dairymen's Association. Those with pressed
or round bottoms, having no inside angles for ferments to collect in,
are preferable. These can be obtained for a trifle if any more money
than common tin pails cost, and should receive the preference of
dairymen when purchasing.

In short, the greatest care should be taken to have all things strictly
clean--not only those that come in contact with the milk, but those
surrounding it. The milkers should be as clean, careful and expeditious
as possible, avoiding all unnecessary or unusual motions, and everything
calculated to alarm or excite the cows. Then, if the cows have had
proper food, drink, care and treatment, there is little reason to
apprehend anything objectionable in either the quantity or quality of
the milk.




CHAPTER V.

COOLING MILK.


The management of milk, when once obtained, is the great practical
consideration with the farmer and cheese-maker. But the first handling
and care devolve upon the farmer; the cheese-maker's duties begin with
the delivery of the milk at the factory. Much, very much, depends upon
the treatment of the milk after milking, and the consequent condition in
which it is delivered. We will therefore begin at the stable or yard and
follow the milk through all its stages, until it is run into the
weighing-can.

Previous suggestions as to cleanliness, etc., being adopted, we find the
hot milk in the pails ready to be strained into the can standing on the
platform or in the wagon. We say "strained," because this is necessary
to absolute cleanliness, which affects the flavor, though at some
factories the patrons are directed not to strain the milk, for the
reason that poor care is so often taken of the strainer, and the keeping
of the strainer drawn tight over the top of the can prevents cooling and
hastens taint. For this reason, we would recommend the use of
strainer-pails, unless the cloth strainer can be stretched above the can
so as to allow the heat to escape and the cool air to come in. These
precautions should be observed, most certainly, if no means is adopted
for cooling the milk before starting for the factory.

The subject of cooling and airing milk has long been earnestly
discussed, and the importance of cooling, at least, we believe is
universally conceded. But how is this end to be attained, with the
thermometer indicating an average temperature of 80°, and perhaps
higher? The first and simplest suggestion is to set the can in a tub of
cold water--cold spring or well-water, or iced water--and to give the
milk frequent agitation with a dipper or other convenient article, care
being taken to stir it from the bottom, as the cold milk naturally
settles, and of course the hot milk lies on the top. Gentle agitation
secures the advantage, also, of preventing the cream from rising. This
makes trouble, and consumes a little time, but we believe the result
will well repay both.

The milk-can should, by all means, be kept out of the sun's rays, and in
a clean airy place. As to the importance of airing milk, there is a
difference of opinion. Some assert that the airing is beneficial only so
far as it assists in cooling, and that if we can succeed in cooling the
milk down to 60°, or thereabouts, immediately after milking, we shall
attain all the good results apparent from exposure to the air. All the
"animal odors," they say, disappear. Be that as it may, it is scarcely
possible to cool milk without more or less exposure to the atmosphere,
and we have never heard it claimed that any bad consequences follow this
exposure. It is possible, however, that it may more rapidly absorb
oxygen, and thus sooner sour. The probability is, that any process which
will secure the proper cooling will also afford the necessary exposure
for the escape of all animal or other odors likely to pass off in the
form of gas. Therefore, practically, it is of very little importance
whether we consider the question of airing milk, in any of the stages of
its management. So we will first look after the processes which secure
known advantages.

Several inventions for the purpose of cooling milk have made their
appearance within the past year or two. Some for the use of factories,
which seem to work quite satisfactorily, and others for the use of
farmers, none of which, we believe, have yet been received with much
favor. They are mostly too complicated, if not too expensive, and too
difficult to keep clean, to ever become generally adopted. Yet, enough
has already been developed to convince us that the desideratum, of a
satisfactory apparatus for cooling milk as fast as, or soon after, it is
taken from the cow, can be realized. The great trouble is, to make
farmers use it faithfully, if at all.

The cooling of milk as fast as milked, or very soon afterward, is the
great question now presented to farmers and cheese-makers. It is of
quite as much and more consequence, than keeping it cool at the
factory--for milk is often so far advanced in decomposition, if not
actually sour or tainted, when received, that it is impossible to work
it up satisfactorily. Some Yankee must give us a simple and cheap
apparatus that will effect the desired result. Such an invention will
greatly improve the quality and increase the consumption and price of
American cheese. But, in the absence of anything better, the can set in
a tub of water and the milk frequently stirred, would be a great
improvement on starting for the factory with hot milk. If the water can
be made to constantly run into the tub, fresh and cool, as the warm
water runs out, so much the better. Another improvement would be some
kind of wagon-cover, permitting the air to pass under it, to keep off
the sun in clear weather and keep out the rain in wet weather. The hot
rays of the sun, pouring on a can of milk for the distance of two or
three miles, perhaps--especially if the milk is not cooled before
starting--cannot fail to do it serious injury. Milk thus exposed often
has a very offensive smell when it reaches the factory-door. This shows
that it is already tainted and in a condition to injure the good milk in
the vat into which it is run, and cause a porous or "huffy" curd.

The question as to the effect of suddenly cooling milk has been somewhat
discussed; also as to how low a temperature is beneficial. Experiments
are necessary to definitely and satisfactorily settle these questions.
Our impression is that, if ice is not used, there is no danger of
cooling milk too suddenly or of getting it too cool. But where ice is
used, especially if permitted to come in contact with the milk, or even
to be separated from it only by a thickness of tin, there is danger of
chilling the particles of milk in immediate contact with the cold
surface, and causing them to prematurely decay. This would, of course,
injure the keeping qualities of the rest of the batch. So far as the
suddenness of the operation is concerned, we doubt if it would have any
material effect, one way or the other. But where any portion of the milk
is chilled, whether the whole batch of milk be slowly or suddenly
reduced in temperature, we should expect it to injure the flavor and
keeping qualities of the cheese. Some experiments, like the one made and
related by Mr. FARRINGTON, of Canada, at the last Convention of the
American Dairymen's Association, would seem to favor the conclusion,
that suddenly reducing the milk to a low temperature is unfavorable to
the production of the best quality of cheese. More experiments, as we
have previously suggested, are necessary to finally settle these
questions. But of the importance of cooling milk down to as low a
temperature as 60° to 65°, there can be no doubt; and there need be no
fear of milk being cooled rapidly enough to injure it where only water
is used in the process of cooling.




CHAPTER VI.

DELIVERING MILK.


Very little attention is usually paid to carrying milk to the factory.
Too many pour the hot milk into a can standing on a wagon or platform,
in the broiling sun, put on the cover, which fits almost air-tight, as
soon as through, and then haul it in this condition, without any shelter
or protection from the sun's rays, to the factory. It is sometimes drawn
two or three miles in this way. Or, as is often the case, it is left
standing on the platform, covered air-tight, until the milk-wagon comes
along. Whether taken on the wagon at the beginning of the route, or left
standing on the platform at the last end of the route, it broils in the
sun an hour or two, with the animal heat all in it. If drawn a long
distance, it is pretty well churned, in addition, and thus a separation
of the butter takes place which no ingenuity of the cheese-maker can
remedy; but when the result is seen in the cream rising on the whey-vat,
anathemas are heaped on his head. Where the milk stands quiet on the
platform, the cream rises and forms an air-tight covering over the top
of the milk, which soon taints next to the cream. And whether standing
still or riding in a tight can, exposed to the sun's rays, without the
animal heat having been expelled, it is scarcely possible to avoid
taint.

In this way, the manufacturer is furnished with perhaps fifty or
seventy-five messes of milk, all more or less tainted, or at least
progressed in decomposition, whether any offensive odor is perceptible
or not. He has these to cool off and keep over night--often with poor
facilities for cooling--for proprietors of factories are too often
ignorant of the importance of providing ample means for cooling, or are
too eager for large profits on small investments, to furnish them. So
the operator dips and stirs away at the decomposing mass until ten or
eleven o'clock, if not later, and finally yields to "tired nature's
sweet restorer, balmy sleep," to rest his weary muscles and care-worn
brain--exhausted, perhaps, by months of incessant toil seven days every
week. By five the next morning he must be on hand, to receive the
scattering messes of milk. At seven or eight o'clock comes the rush.
Then the messes begin to drop off, and by half-past nine or ten o'clock
the last steaming batch, with an unmistakable rotten-egg smell, makes
its appearance.

Now, what has the cheese-maker got on his hands, some sweltering
morning, during the season when it is "too hot to make butter," and
people kindly draw their dairy liquids to the cheese-factory? Why, on
rising in the morning and rubbing open his eyes, he breaks the cream on
his milk. The under surface has a sickish, sour smell, which tells him
very plainly that it cannot be worked up too soon. But what is he to do?
The answer is plain enough: Run into this fermenting mass an equal
quantity of the same hot stuff which he received the night before! What
will be its condition by the time he gets through? No matter! It is his
business to make cheese of it. He is employed for that purpose. If the
cheese does not prove of the first quality, every patron who furnishes
him stinking milk will have strong suspicions that he does not
understand his business! And some even insist that the cheese-maker
shall pay for all the poor cheese! But any man who is fool enough to
make such an agreement, ought to suffer, at least one season. The
thought of it, however, is almost "enough to make a minister swear."
And, by the way, we have been told of one instance where a minister left
the pulpit and took to the cheese-factory--probably for the purpose of
practically learning a lesson of patience. He was simple-minded enough
to agree to pay for all the poor cheese. He soon found his salary was
not equal to such a demand. So he set himself about watching the
weighing-can, to keep out the bad milk. This was a Herculean task he had
not counted on. We are not informed whether he swore or not; but he
actually took his station outside, with a heavy rod of iron, which he
was compelled to use, on one or two occasions, to keep the patrons from
running rotten milk into the weighing-can! His experience was an
instructive one, and ought to be a warning to all ambitious clergymen,
as well as to innocent-minded cheese-makers!

We do not mean to say, that the patrons of all factories are as bad as
above indicated, nor that they are no better on an average. But we do
mean to say, that too many are very careless, and that almost every
factory has a few patrons whose milk is apt to be in a bad condition
when delivered. Besides, while we hear frequent complaints about bad
milk, we never hear of any one's delivering milk in too good a
condition. Patrons need have no fears of this, and may take it for
granted that they cannot take too much pains with milk, both in point of
cleanliness and of keeping it out of the hot sun and expelling the
animal heat. We should expect to find, if a careful investigation were
made, that the most unsuccessful factories are those where milk is
delivered in the worst condition, while the successful ones are those
where patrons are more careful and the milk received is generally good.
More often depends on the milk than on the cheese-maker. We have heard
it remarked, that "almost anybody can make good cheese of perfectly
sweet milk;" but it is a smart chap indeed who can make good cheese of
poor milk. Every cheese-maker will appreciate our remarks, and we hope
they may not be altogether lost on some patrons.

It will not, as a general thing, pay to draw milk over two or two and a
half miles, for two reasons: First, it consumes too much valuable time,
and next, it churns the milk too much and keeps it too long shut up
tight and exposed to the hot atmosphere, if not the sun. If milk,
however, were thoroughly cooled as soon as milked, and then carried on
easy springs over a smooth road, there is little doubt that it might be
drawn four or five miles without much injury, but the expense would be a
serious objection to going so long a distance.

Cans that hold over a barrel will be found inconvenient. It is better to
use two smaller ones, that can be easily handled, than one very large
one. They will cost but little more, and will last considerably longer,
as the strain on them will be less. A large can is made of the same
material, and is but little if any stronger from additional bracing and
staying, and is liable to spring aleak.

As to the use of faucets, it is generally objected to by cheese-makers,
as too little pains is taken by many to keep them clean. Their use is,
therefore, discarded as far as possible, and we believe cans are
generally made without them. Yet, some factories still continue
receiving milk through conductors, where, of course, faucets are
necessary. They are also a convenience to the patron, in many instances,
where the can may be used for other purposes than holding milk. It is,
therefore, not likely that their use will ever be entirely done away
with. But, if neatly and smoothly put in, and care is observed in
cleaning them, there can be no serious objection to them. Small faucets,
however, should never be tolerated. Nothing smaller than inch-and-a-half
or two-inch faucets should be put in. These are easy to clean, and
greatly facilitate emptying. A small spiteful stream is a nuisance, and
causes a waste of time at the factory door where expedition is what
everybody wants, and is what is needed. If you use a faucet, use a large
one, and keep it scrupulously clean.




CHAPTER VII.

RECEIVING MILK.


Most factories now unload milk by the use of cranes or some other kind
of tipping apparatus. Some of the older factories--there are no very old
ones--continue the use of conductors for transferring the milk to the
weighing-can. This is the easier but the slower way, and necessitates
the use of at least double the number of weighing-cans that are required
by the crane. Besides, in the use of conductors, there is the constant
inconvenience of standing out in the rain, in wet weather, to hold the
conductor, while there is more or less liability to accident from the
backing up or starting of the team. Conductors are mean, even
impossible, things to clean; and their use, when there is a rush of
teams, requires a second man or boy to hold them, while the first does
the weighing and makes the necessary entries on the milk-book. If sixty
to eighty messes are to be received, at least two weighing cans will be
necessary. But by the use of a crane, one weighing-can will do the same
work--always provided it has a faucet of not less than three inches in
diameter, so that the can may be emptied while a team is driving up and
the patron's can is being grappled and elevated ready for tipping. A
large faucet is of equal advantage when conductors are used, and, in
that case, every patron's can should be furnished with at least a
two-inch faucet, to facilitate the transfer of milk to the weighing-can.

The use of the crane is, of course, not entirely free from accident. The
strain on the can, when full, is very great, and it is liable to spring
aleak, unless well made. But cans made with reference to this use are
now furnished with crowning or with patent bottoms, and are so well
hooped and braced that no serious accidents of this kind are likely to
occur. A can-ear, or a rope long in use, may break. There may be
carelessness in hooking on to the can, and the milk may be slopped or
spilled by letting a full can turn over too soon, or by too suddenly
letting the milk dash into the weighing-can. All these operations
require care and experience; but, with proper management, the loss from
accident, during a season, will be very slight--perhaps nothing at all.

Great care should be taken in weighing milk, to not only weigh it right,
but to make the patron feel that his milk is honestly weighed, and that
he is likewise honestly credited on the milk-book. Much suspicion and
hard feeling are liable to spring up, if the man who weighs the milk has
the appearance of being hasty and careless--especially if he should be
ill-natured and disagreeable in his manners. And it may not be out of
place here to remark, that good manners and a spirit of accommodation
are no more out of place in a cheese-factory than anywhere else. Among a
large number of patrons, it would be strange if there were not
disagreeable, ill-mannerly men; but a man who retains his
self-possession and always acts fairly and talks reasonably, will seldom
fail to get along tolerably well and retain the good will of all. It is
the right of the patron to know that his milk is correctly weighed and
credited, and every reasonable facility should be afforded him to
satisfy himself that he is fairly dealt with.

It becomes the duty of one receiving milk to see that it is delivered in
proper condition. Experience, a good eye and a good nose, are all
useful assistants. Even with the use of all these, messes will sometimes
get into the vat that never ought to be there. But when a patron's milk
is found not to be right, it is not necessary to insult or abuse him,
nor to make a general exposure of him. Neither law nor duty requires
this. He should be kindly informed of the fact, told what the matter is
with his milk and what he had better do to remove the evil. If you do
not wish to take the mess, you can express your regrets at his
misfortune, and show him that it would cause great damage, some of which
must necessarily fall on himself. If the mess is objectionable, but will
pass, give him notice that you will be obliged to refuse it in future,
if not in a better condition. When you have done this, more words with
him are unnecessary, and you have all the advantage, for the law and the
community are on your side. But, with a reasonable man, it will not be
necessary to more than call his attention to the fact that his milk is
bad. The cause may be the result of accident or oversight on the part of
his help, and he will at once set himself to work to apply the remedy.
The importance of delivering milk in good condition is more and more
acknowledged every year, and not a few patrons pride themselves on
delivering as good milk as any of their neighbors. It is well to
encourage this feeling by giving every man credit who takes pains with
his milk. Nothing is worse than wholesale denunciation and fault
finding. It only discourages many, creates bad feeling, and makes an
up-hill road a rough one as well. A cheese-maker needs friends, if
anybody does; and if he does not get them among his patrons, he is not
likely to get them at all. In that case, his seven days a week of hard,
thankless toil and care are likely to weigh heavily on body and mind.

The greatest difficulty is usually experienced in old factories, where
the conveniences are not generally up to the more modern mark, and
patrons fell into bad habits before experience had developed a better
knowledge of the requirements of cheese-making. New patrons will submit
to be trained, and a sensible cheese-maker, who knows what he wants, can
generally get them to do almost anything at the opening of a new
factory. In this way, he can discipline them and get them in the habit
of taking good care of their milk. But, in an old factory, where
everything started off badly, the old adage, that "it is hard to learn
old dogs new tricks," is apt to be exemplified. They dislike
innovations, think a new man, who wants to be particular, wishes to put
them to useless trouble, and they are not disposed to gratify him, but
rather to growl at him, and feel that what was good enough for others is
good enough for him. Such conduct is all wrong, and those who are guilty
of it stand in their own light.




CHAPTER VIII.

BIG AVERAGES.


It is the custom in many factories to balance the scales so that a pound
or so is taken out of each mess, in order to help make "a big average"
for the season. That is, every mess is made to weigh a pound or so less
than its actual weight, and is so entered on the book. In this way, if
sixty or seventy messes are received, the cheese-maker has that number
of pounds of milk more to make up than is charged against him. This
amount twice a day would enable him to turn out some twelve or fourteen
pounds of cheese more than he ought to if he received no more pounds of
milk than he gives credit for on the milk-book. Thus he makes it appear
to the patrons, and publishes it ultimately to the world, that he uses
less pounds of milk in making a pound of cheese than is the actual fact.
In common phrase, he "makes a big average."

Let us illustrate a little. Suppose ten hundred and ten pounds of milk
are delivered in ten messes. The entry on the book is one thousand
pounds. Out of this he makes one hundred and one pounds of cured cheese.
If the milk had been correctly weighed, the fact would appear that he
made one pound of marketable cheese for every ten pounds of milk. But it
really appears that it took a fraction less than ten pounds of milk, or
9.9 pounds, for a pound of cheese. This is the advantage which he has,
in the eyes of the community, over the maker who gives honest weight.
This is the reward of his petty dishonesty.

In justification of this, it is argued that it keeps up not only the
reputation of the maker but the reputation of the factory, while it
wrongs no one, since the patrons get all the cheese, or its equivalent
in money, and all are served alike. We admit that the patrons get all
the products of the milk, but let us see for a moment whether all are
treated fairly. Every patron has a pound of milk deducted from each
mess. SMITH brings a hundred pound mess, and is therefore docked one
hundredth part of it. JONES, with only one cow, delivers a ten pound
mess, and is docked one-tenth of it. Thus, at the end of thirty days,
each has delivered sixty messes. SMITH has delivered 6,000 pounds and
been credited for 5,940. JONES has delivered 600 pounds, and got credit
for 540. If ten pounds of milk make one pound of cheese, the account
ought to stand thus:


     Smith, 6000 lbs. milk,    600 lbs. cheese.
     Jones,  600 lbs. milk,     60 lbs. cheese.
                               ---
       Total,                  660


But, under the system of deducting a pound from each mess, in order to
show a "big average," the account really stands thus:


     Smith, 5,940 lbs. milk,   605 lbs. cheese.
     Jones,   540 lbs. milk,    55 lbs. cheese.
                               ---
       Total,                  660


At twenty cents a pound for cheese, JONES, because he is poor and
delivers a small mess, loses just one dollar on his month's milk, and
SMITH, because he is better off and has a bigger mess, gets the dollar
added to his profits. This, in plain figures, is the result of deducting
weight in order to show a "big average." Let no one who reads this do it
again. He can no longer plead ignorance, and continue to rob PETER for
the benefit of PAUL, under the supposition that he is treating all alike
and fairly.

Unquestionably, something should be allowed for the difference between a
dry and a wet can. The amount is trifling, and can be got at by
balancing the scales immediately after running out a can of milk. But,
when the scales are balanced with a wet can, they will not balance
exactly when the can is dry; and whoever delivers the first mess and
wets the can will suffer a slight loss, unless care is taken to give
good weight. The variation will generally not be more than a quarter of
a pound or so, and can be nearly enough approximated by attention to the
fractions of a pound denoted by the scales.

Of course, in weighing milk, only the full pounds can be counted and
credited, the fractions going to make up full weight. As quick weight is
demanded in selling cheese, milk when received should be weighed in the
same way. This is fair, and ought to be satisfactory to all. But whether
quick or slow weight is given, let it be honest. In the long run,
"honesty is the best policy" in weighing milk as well as in other
transactions; and, in this case, it is absolutely essential to justice.
A little deduction or variation on a single mess, is of small
consequence; but "many mickles make a muckle," and when the variation
from a correct standard is constantly in one direction, after a while it
amounts to a noticeable quantity.

Occasionally a mess of milk will get run into the vat without weighing,
by the weigher forgetting to close the gate or faucet. When an accident
of this kind happens, there is no fairer way than to give credit for an
average mess as compared with the messes at the same time of day
previously. If the patron is a fair man, there will be little trouble in
hitting upon a satisfactory figure. If disposed to make the most of a
mistake, he will be likely to tell you that he thought he had a larger
mess than usual, and crowd you up to as high a figure as possible. But
one has to exercise his best judgment, and give such credit as he thinks
will wrong no one. Such mistakes, though almost unavoidable, are
unpleasant to one who is sensitive and wishes to keep the good side of
all; and not only care should be taken, but every precaution should be
used, to prevent them. The handle or lever for closing the gate should
be in full sight, and one should acquire the habit of working
systematically, so that he may instinctively do what is necessary, even
though his attention be for the moment diverted from his business.

Great care is required, too, in making the entries in the milk book. A
mess, by carelessness, may be credited to the wrong man; but when the
man to whom the credit is wrongfully given presents himself, the mistake
is likely to be discovered, though you may not be able to determine at
once to whom the credit belongs. In such case, preserve the figures, and
when your messes are all in, turn over the leaves of the book and see
who is without credit. The size of the mess is generally some
indication. One is liable, too, to make a mistake of fifty or a hundred
pounds in looking at the scales. But the habit of comparing every entry
with the previous ones as you make it, will show the discrepancy. Where
such variation is noticed, of course another glance at the weight will
determine whether it is a mistake or not. It is a very good practice to
call out the weight of each mess. This affords satisfaction to the
patron as well as guards against allowing errors to pass. But, under
all circumstances, too much attention cannot be paid to keeping the
milk-book correctly. It is the only guide to the distribution of the
proceeds of the factory, and the thought of even a possible mistake
ought to give an honest man a strong sense of responsibility. No bank
book is of more importance.




CHAPTER IX.

CONDUCTORS, STRAINERS, ETC.


When treating of receiving milk, we spake of conductors as difficult to
clean. We consider them an abomination in a cheese factory; yet almost
every factory uses them. We believe there are some, however, arranged
for delivering and receiving milk by driving through one end of the
factory. The milk is brought in small cans, out of which it is poured
into the weighing-can by hand. The weighing-can is on a truck running on
a railway along the sides or ends of the vats, into which the milk is
readily emptied by tipping. This does away with both faucets and
conductors, and the idea is worthy the attention of all factorymen.

When cranes are used in receiving milk, the outside conductors are not
needed, but there are two or three long conductors, inside the factory,
used for running the milk from the weighing-can into the vats. Sometimes
we see one of these tin tubes ten or fifteen feet long. It is impossible
to keep such a thing clean. A peep into this, or shorter ones, will show
that they are not kept clean. Take as much pains as the hands may to
clean them with a swab on a long stick, they will soon get coated over
inside by the milk drying on; and, unless extra pains is taken, they
will be lined with a beautiful coating of green and gold! They are used
at night, and, unless the weather is very bad--and many pay no attention
to the weather--they are allowed to stand over night where used, ready
for the next morning. The milk and cream get dried on the inside
surface, and nobody has the time, if the disposition, to soak it off.
Further, tin conductors will get dents in them. The milk will collect
and dry in the angles made by these dents. How, in the name of common
sense, can any one get at them to clean them, in a tube ten or even four
feet long? It is an impossibility. The milk collects, from day to day,
until the conductor is full of foul ferments, through which all the milk
of the factory is run and tainted. It is no fault of the cheese-maker,
because he can't help it, if he employs a hand constantly on these
abominable tubes. He may use a swab with strong ley, or salt and water,
or both, and run hot water through the tubes till the patrons begin to
come with their milk, but the "damned spots" will not "out." Of course,
he will somewhat neutralize their active properties as ferments, but he
does not altogether get rid of them. The only way in which he can do it,
is to pitch the nasty things out of the window.

If conductors must be used--and their use seems to be a foregone
conclusion--let them be made in the form of open spouts. A foot or so
next to the head, is all the tube that is needed--and this should be
large enough to readily admit the hand for the purpose of washing. The
rest should be an open spout, which can be easily and speedily cleaned
and scalded. Many owners of factories, however, are too penurious to
spend a few dollars in order to get rid of this nuisance of long tin
conductors. They would rather lose--or, at least, run the risk of
losing--five hundred dollars on the sale of their cheese, than spend
five dollars for the purpose of avoiding this fruitful source of taint.
If the cheese is poor, the blame can be laid on the cheese-maker; or, if
the taint is too manifest in the vat of milk or curd, it can be charged
upon the carelessness of the patrons.

There is another source of trouble, which lies entirely with the
cheese-maker, or with the hands under him whom he trusts. This is the
strainer. In cool weather, perhaps there will be no difficulty, if the
strainer is properly washed, scalded and dried each morning after the
milk is all in. But in hot weather, especially if the atmosphere is damp
and steamy, if a strainer is left over night without rinsing, it is sure
to sour. Yet, the strainer, like the conductor, is often left at night
just as used, ready for the reception of the next morning's milk. Both
are likely to be sour. The milk in the vat is "old," especially next the
cream, which acts as an air-tight covering. Now, run hot milk through
the sour can, conductor and strainer, into this mess of changed milk,
and any one, with even but a modicum of brains, can see what is likely
to be the consequence. It will be a batch of sour, leaky cheese.

Where an agitator is used, the trouble of milk souring or tainting
beneath an air-tight covering of cream, is obviated. Washing cans,
conductors and strainers at night, gets rid of the difficulty from these
sources--that is, as far as the can and strainer are concerned, and
partially as regards the conductor. A thorough rinsing in cold water,
immediately after the last mess is run in, will be found to answer the
purpose. It is usually late, and there is no hot water for regular
washing and scalding. But a few moments' work will complete the rinsing
in cold water, and this will not be found a very hard task for even the
jaded hands of a cheese-factory. During all the hot weather, this should
be strictly attended to. It will pay in a double sense--it will prevent
sourness, and make the can, conductor and strainer easier to wash the
next day.

The old-fashioned thermometer is also a source of annoyance, if care is
not taken in cleaning it. It will fill up with ferments between the face
and back, in an astonishingly short space of time, during hot weather.
In short, there is no way of keeping it perfectly clean, except by
slipping the thermometer out of the back or case, and carefully washing
and scalding it--and in doing this, it is exceedingly liable to get
broken. We are therefore glad to notice the introduction of a new
thermometer for dairy purposes. It is simply constructed, plain, easy to
clean, and no more expensive than the common kind now in use. Those in
need of thermometers will find this style much better adapted to their
uses. The glass is fastened to a plain plate of metal, the two edges of
which are bent forward to give it the requisite stiffness.

Of course, agitators, dippers, rakes, &c., need to be carefully cleaned.
But we have before spoken of the importance of the most scrupulous
attention to cleanliness throughout, on the part of the cheese-maker as
well as of the patron. Cleanliness is an indispensable virtue in all
departments of dairying.




CHAPTER X.

COLOR.


One would hardly think of associating cheese-making with the fine arts;
yet, in what other light can we view the subject of color? It adds
nothing to the quality of the cheese, but rather detracts from it. It is
expensive and troublesome, and grows more so every year, as the demand
for annotto runs up the price and leads to adulteration. But as long as
we make cheese for a foreign market, we must adapt our goods to the
tastes of that market, whether they be physical or mental. Our home
market would, perhaps, not suffer from the omission of color; but the
English market demands, to a large extent, highly-colored cheese. The
Liverpool market will take a small quantity of pale cheese, but it does
not equal more than one-fifth of the demand of the English market. A few
factories, which sell exclusively to buyers who supply the Liverpool
demand for pale cheese, may safely omit the color; but all which depend
on the general market cannot safely do so. The London market specially
demands a high color, and it is no less exacting now than it has been
heretofore. The cry of buyers generally is, "Keep up the color!" The
exceptions to this are few, and are confined to those who have special
orders for pale cheese to supply the demand above indicated.

The English consumer acquired his taste for golden-hued cheese before
the American make found any considerable market abroad--indeed, before
we had much cheese to sell. The first object in coloring seems to have
been to give a rich butter color. In this way, cheese was made to
appear rich whether it really was so or not. But the shade has been
considerably intensified and the English eye is best pleased with the
color produced by the use of prime annotto, with which it has become
familiar. This may be a prejudice, but it is a comparatively harmless
one; and since our customer is willing to pay for it, there seems to be
no good reason why it should not be gratified. It is for our interest to
please the eye as well as the appetite of so large a buyer of our
products as England. She wants about four-fifths of her cheese highly
but nicely colored.

The complaint among buyers generally is, that color is too low. In reply
to suggestions about the fact, makers often say that they never used
more coloring, but it does not produce the desired effect. They have
paid a high price for what was supposed to be prime annotto, but it
proves to be extensively adulterated, and therefore weak. This is not
the complaint of all, but of many. Some have adopted the use of prepared
annotto, and find it cheaper and more satisfactory. When prime annotto
could readily be had, it was cheaper to buy the basket and prepare it
themselves. But now, one poor basket, during a season, imposes a loss
greater than the difference in price between the prepared and the
unprepared.

There is another evil about the use of poor annotto. It is not only
expensive and does not give the desired color, but what color it does
give fades out with age, and leaves the cheese with a cloudy, mottled
appearance, which is very offensive to the eye of our best customers.
Again, where poor annotto is bought in the basket and prepared at the
factory, it contains a large amount of sediment, and this sediment,
often containing deleterious substances, too frequently gets into the
cheese. The liquid is not properly settled and racked off. This affords
another argument in favor of buying prepared annotto, which, if properly
put up, is free from sediment.

Those who prefer to buy the basket annotto and prepare it themselves,
should buy only on the warrant of the dealer that it is what it is
recommended to be. The dealer should test a sample of his annotto,
before offering it for sale, and know precisely what he is selling.
Buyers by thus purchasing only of well-known dealers, who sell upon
honor, will discourage rascality. This is the only method we see for
keeping the spurious article out of market, and securing satisfactory
results in coloring.

We would suggest to those who prepare their own annotto, that they use
concentrated ley or potash. By doing so, they will secure just as good a
shade as they can by using ley from wood-ashes, and not only save the
trouble of bothering with a leach, but secure uniform strength. Two
leaches will seldom turn out ley of the same strength. Sometimes it will
be strong and satisfactory. But if you happen to get a lot of soft wood
ashes in your leach, the ley will be weak, imperfectly dissolve the
annotto, and materially injure the liquid.

In fact, it is difficult to get your coloring twice alike by the use of
a common leach. But with concentrated ley or potash, the same quantities
or proportions of materials, mixed in the same way, will produce the
same result. You can therefore keep your color even, and will not be
called upon to experiment and change your hand every time you prepare a
new batch of annotto. The difference in expense will be trifling, and
rather in favor of the use of potash, if time and trouble are counted of
any value.

The prepared annotto ought to be kept in a stone jar, as the ley
operates injuriously upon wood, and is liable to leave a tub in a leaky
condition as the liquid is used out and the tub dries. Where annotto is
purchased already prepared, of course it comes in vessels suitable to
keep it in; but when prepared at the factory, a receptacle has to be
provided, and nothing is better than stone or earthen-ware. In hot
weather, the liquid is liable to smell badly from the action of the heat
on it. A little salt stirred in will be found useful as a preventive
against this.

It is not necessary to discuss at length the question of the effect of
coloring on the quality of the cheese. The introduction of a strong
alkaline preparation cannot be without some effect; and when that
happens to be adulterated with some vile substance, the effect cannot be
otherwise than injurious. The annotto itself is generally conceded to be
harmless; and the ley is, at most, but a neutralizer of the lactic acid,
but the quantity is not sufficient, perhaps, to produce any perceptible
result. At all events, color is demanded; annotto, prepared with ley or
potash, is the accepted material; so we have only to color with annotto
to suit the taste of our customer.

We are assured that nicely colored cheese will bring from a cent to a
cent and a half a pound more than the same quality of cheese will bring
when pale. Buyers in some instances advise the making of pale cheese
because they have a special order for it; but they usually expect to get
it a little under the highest market quotations, and factorymen who
allow themselves to drop the color on the advice of an interested buyer,
because it is easy and costs nothing directly to do so, run the risk of
being caught and of losing a great deal more than they can save by
omitting the coloring. We never heard of a lot of cheese being condemned
because it was too nicely colored; but we frequently hear of complaints
and losses because cheese is too pale. The chances are at least four to
one in favor of high-colored cheese; and even the fifth chance is not
positively against color, though the other four are strongly against
_lack_ of color. He who wishes to have the widest range of markets, and
to command the best markets, must pay strict attention to color--not
only must he color, but color well and evenly.

We have an objection to color, for reasons satisfactory to ourselves;
and buyers can have no interest in inducing makers to color their
cheese, beyond the fact that it makes it more marketable--and in this,
patrons and factorymen have a much greater interest than dealers can
have. The market demands a rich, even color, and will not be satisfied
without it. We say, therefore, _as a matter of dollars and cents_--not
of taste, choice or convenience--_keep up the color_.

We will give two recipes for preparing annotto: 1. To five pounds of
prime annotto put five gallons of strong ley, made from wood ashes;
gradually heat up and dissolve the annotto, care being taken to not
scorch it on the bottom of the kettle. Of course thorough stirring is
essential. When the annotto is all dissolved, add five pounds of sal
soda and five gallons of soft water. Then gently boil the whole for
twenty or thirty minutes. This makes about ten gallons of prepared
coloring. If boiled away to less, add sufficient ley and soft water, in
equal quantities, to make that amount. Some omit the sal soda; but it is
generally believed that it not only adds strength to the preparation,
but improves the color by giving it more of a rich, buttery hue, instead
of a red. The whole, when sufficiently cooled to handle safely, should
be set in a tub, with a faucet two or three inches from the bottom, to
settle. When settled, it can be drawn off, and is ready for use.

2. Mix in the proportion of five quarts of water to half a pound of
concentrated ley, and one pound of prime annotto. First dissolve the ley
in the water, by heating and stirring, and then add the annotto, and
dissolve it. Boil gently for half an hour. Care, as with the other
preparation, should be taken not to burn it. Settle and rack off. Then
your liquid is ready for use.

The second recipe is the one most used, and is easiest to prepare, as it
avoids the labor, perplexity and risk of making the ley, which may not
always be of the desired strength, as the ashes may not be the same. But
if ashes are used, hot water is best to leech through them. A quart of
salt to ten gallons of preparation will improve its keeping qualities.




CHAPTER XI.

RENNET.


An indispensable requisite in making cheese is good rennet. Nothing else
will answer the purpose. Different substitutes have from time to time
been tried, but all have met with indifferent success, or absolutely
failed. Acids will produce coagulation, but they spoil the quality of
the cheese. It was once supposed that the gastric juice of the calve's
stomach was acid, and produced coagulation by souring. But it has been
demonstrated that good curd can be produced from sweet new milk, by the
use of rennet, without the development of acid in either the curd or the
whey. How or why the principle obtained by soaking the calve's stomach
produces coagulation has not yet been discovered. What the principle
_is_, is not even known. It appears to be contained in the gastric juice
secreted by the inner membranes of the stomach, and a small quantity of
rennet, stirred into a vat of milk, seems to coagulate it in the same
manner that milk taken into the calve's stomach is coagulated. We all
know the fact that by the use of rennet we can make cheese. Beyond this,
we have little knowledge; so far as we are aware, scientific men are
just as much in the dark as the cheese-maker.

As the stomach of the calf is bifold, we have seen the mistake
frequently made of saving the wrong one. But we presume patrons are
generally well informed on this point now, after so many years'
experience. Where the stomach is not entirely empty, the presence of
curd is a sure guide. Always save the stomach that contains the curd,
and no mistake will be made. If the stomach is empty, save the one that
has a smooth inside surface. The one that has a rough, honey-comb-like
inside surface is worthless for cheese-making, and should, of course, be
rejected.

There are three or four ways of preserving the rennet or stomach, for
future use. Only two, we believe, are generally practiced in America. In
all cases, the rennet is to be turned wrong side out, all its contents
being thrown away, and the inner surface carefully cleaned by picking
off all hairs and bits of grass, hay or other substance which the calf
may have taken into its stomach. But the rennet should never be washed,
and great care should be taken not to remove any of the inner membrane
of the rennet, as in this membrane resides all its strength. Washing
would rinse out the gastric juice, and weaken the rennet; and much
washing would render it nearly or quite worthless.

When properly cleaned, the rennet should be thoroughly rubbed with salt,
outside and in, turned the right side out, stretched on a crotched stick
or on a hoop, and hung up in a cool, dry place, to cure. In private
dairies, the farmer's wife, after salting the rennet, sometimes spreads
it on an earthen plate and sets it away to dry, frequently turning it on
the plate. Rennets dried in this way are nice, but it is too much work
to tend to them for a general adoption of this method of drying. Drying
on a stick or a hoop is the common way, and answers the purpose very
well. The only trouble is to find a place both dry and cool. It is
generally conceded, we believe, that heat injures the strength of the
rennet. Hence the importance of curing it in a cool place. Freezing is
thought by many to add to or develop the strength of the rennet. Be this
as it may, old rennets, that have hang up in the dry-house or some
other convenient place through the winter, will go much further in
cheese-making than new rennets.

Another method of preserving rennets is by packing them into salt. This
is quite common, and is practiced by some of our best factories. It is
less troublesome than drying them, and is a sure preventive against
moths, which are apt to get into dried rennets. By salting them down,
there is less trouble to find a cool place in which to keep them during
the summer. But care should be taken to use only the purest salt in
packing rennets. Salt not fit to salt curd with is not fit to pack
rennets in, for when the rennets are used, the salt will be in the
liquid and find its way into the mass of curd. Besides, pure salt is
much the better preservative, and will keep either meat or rennets
sweeter than impure salt.

Some think rennets preserved in this way are not as strong as those that
are dried. We do not quite see the philosophy of this, since by packing
in salt, none of the virtues of the rennet can escape by evaporation,
and must be retained either in the rennet or in the salt. It may be said
that the salt injures the strength of the rennet. If so, why does it not
prove equally injurious when the rennet is dried? In both methods of
preserving, salt is freely used--generally all that the rennet will
absorb. A batch of dried rennets may go farther than the same number
packed in salt, and _vice versa_; but this does not prove that the
_same_ rennets would not have equal virtues preserved by either method.

The German method of preserving rennets is by blowing them up like a
bladder, and drying them. This is the way in which the Bavarian rennets,
which reach this country, are preserved. We believe no salt is used.
The method is simple, and if it answers the purpose equally well, we see
not why it may not be adopted in this country. We understand that the
Bavarian rennets give very good satisfaction. But, as we have never used
them, nor seen them used, we cannot speak from positive knowledge.

Veal rennets are generally supposed to be better than deacon rennets.
Certain it is that the stomach of a calf that never sucked the cow is
not worth much in cheese-making. It is both small and weak. It seems to
be necessary that the process of digestion should go on for a while, at
least, that all the functions of the animal may become active and a full
secretion of gastric juice take place. Some are of the opinion that the
rennet is best when the calf is from three to five days old, as at that
age it is not likely to have taken anything but milk into its stomach,
which is best prepared for digesting that kind of food, the first
process of which is coagulation. Veal calves are apt to get hold of
other food, and the stomach is therefore less exclusively adapted to a
milk diet. Hence, it is argued, if the veal rennet is better than the
deacon, the stomach of the cow or ox ought to be better than that of the
veal calf. Whatever may be the conclusion, we have, and shall probably
continue to have, both deacon and veal rennets, both kinds of which have
been found to work satisfactorily.

Much seems to depend on the condition of the calf when killed. If it
goes too long without food, the stomach gets inflamed and is not only
deprived of its strength, but is partially diseased, and, therefore,
unfit for cheese-making. This is the condition of most of the rennets
taken from calves killed in our larger cities, the calves going without
food sometimes two or three days. On the other hand, when the calf has a
full stomach, the juices seem to be absorbed in the food, and the rennet
is, therefore, weak. The best time for killing the calf appears to be
just after the stomach has emptied itself, when the appetite of the calf
begins to be sharp and the secretions of gastric juice are copious. This
will generally be found from twelve to eighteen hours after eating. If
fed at night, it may be killed any time the next forenoon.




CHAPTER XII.

PREPARING RENNET.


The process of preparing rennet for use is very simple, and so generally
understood that we need not more than give a few hints on the subject.
In putting rennets to soak, care should be taken not to allow any
tainted ones to get into the batch. When they are packed in salt, it is
not difficult to make a selection. If the poor rennet does not smell, it
will be pretty likely to be discolored and unhealthful looking, instead
of having a whitish, wholesome appearance. All rennets thus discolored
should be thrown away as worse than useless--as positively injurious. If
the rennets are dried, it may not be so easy to detect the poor ones
before putting them to soak. After soaking, their quality will be quite
apparent; but much of their injurious effect may be avoided by promptly
rejecting them without rubbing. It is generally, and we believe
correctly, understood that diseased or tainted rennets produce both
huffy and bad-keeping cheese, by the introduction of decayed animal
substances. It certainly cannot improve the quality of the cheese to mix
with it the broth of carrion.

Clear whey is the common and best liquid for soaking rennets. Water was
once and is now sometimes used, but it needs to be very soft and pure,
and is improved by boiling. We have never tried water, but it is
asserted by those who have used it for soaking rennets that a batch
prepared with it will not keep sweet as long as one prepared with whey,
but that boiling the water keeps it sweet longer than it will keep if
not boiled. We think the purer the whey the better, and therefore
prefer that which first separates from the curd after setting. Some are
not particular, and some prefer the salt whey that runs from the
presses. There is a saving of salt in this, but we think this liquid
cannot be as good to introduce into milk as that containing less cheesy
and buttery particles. Boiling the whey and skimming it, afterward
allowing it to cool and settle, that the sediment may also be excluded,
is said to be a great improvement, and we can easily believe this to be
true. It is not only free from impurities, but it forms a sharp acid
that acts readily upon the rennets and extracts more completely the
pepsin, gastric juice, or whatever it may be that coagulates the milk.
It is said that quite a saving in rennets can be effected by using
scalded whey for soaking them.

Twenty or twenty-five prime rennets put into a half barrel of whey will
make a good preparation. It can be made stronger, of course, by the
addition of more rennets, or pouring in a less amount of whey; but it is
questionable if the entire strength can be extracted by using a less
quantity of whey in proportion to the number of rennets. They need to be
rubbed at least three times, each time in a new batch of whey. The
second time the preparation will be found about as strong as the first.
The third rubbing and rinsing may be in fresh whey to be used for
soaking a new batch of rennets. We like to have two tubs or jars for
soaking the rennets, one for the first and the other for the second
rubbing, alternately. After rubbing the second time, put the rennets in
a sack made of strainer cloth, to keep them separate, and soak them with
the batch intended for the next second rubbing. In this way the strength
of the preparation from the batch may be kept equal to that from the
first. Rub the third time, and rinse in fresh whey, as before indicated,
when the strength will be found pretty completely extracted. If dried
rennets are used, it will be necessary to add salt to the whey when the
batch is put to soak. Every time new whey is added, more salt will be
required. Where the rennets are packed in salt there will usually be
salt enough for the first soaking adhering to them; if not, it may be
increased in quantity by a few handfuls of that loose in the barrel in
which they have been packed. As the rennets will float on the whey, they
should be thoroughly stirred up as often as night and morning, and a
little salt sprinkled over those left on the top.

We prefer stone jars, both for soaking rennets and to keep the prepared
rennet in, because they are so much more easily kept sweet than wooden
tubs can be. Of all things, we detest a stinking rennet tub or jar.
Frequent scalding, when emptied, is necessary. When the preparation is
kept in a tub, it will be advantageous to rub a little salt, each
morning, on the sides of the tub left exposed to the air, after setting
the milk, by the lowering of the liquid. By all means, do anything and
everything that may be necessary to keep the rennet tubs or jars from
stinking so badly that the stench will nearly suffocate one on
uncovering them. A sweet rennet tub is the evidence of important
qualities in a cheese-maker--care and cleanliness.

Of course, there are various ways of managing, as regards quantity,
convenience's sake, and so on, but we do not believe the principles
involved in the process of selecting and preparing rennets for use, as
we have given it, can be violated or neglected without loss in some
manner. The importance of properly-prepared rennet, and of keeping it
sweet and clean, cannot be too highly estimated. "Bad luck" in
cheese-making might not infrequently be traced to the rennet tub; while
"good luck" may be as often traced to the same source. Look out for your
rennets and take care of your rennet-tubs or jars. They may make or mar
your fortune.




CHAPTER XIII.

SETTING.


The temperature of 82° to 86° is generally considered the best for
setting--the former in hot and the latter in cold weather. This gives an
average of 84° for mild weather. Perhaps this point is as good as any
for setting. But it is worth bearing in mind that the milk will
coagulate sooner, after adding the rennet, at a high than at a low
temperature. The same milk will set quicker at 86° than at 82°, and at
the points in the vat where the heat is greatest, or the milk cools
least by radiation, the curd will become tough and difficult to cut,
while other parts of the mass will remain tender and cut easily. This
not only demonstrates the greater activity of the rennet at a higher
heat, but the importance of an even heat throughout, and of keeping it
from falling. Some throw a cloth over the vat, after the milk begins to
thicken and agitation is no longer necessary to keep the cream from
rising. This is a good practice, we believe, as it retards the reduction
of temperature by radiation, and keeps the heat more equalized. This
will secure a more uniform action of the rennet, and render the cutting
less difficult and less liable to cause waste.

When the rennet is once added and thoroughly incorporated with the milk,
we believe it would be better if the mass could have perfect rest until
the curd is ready to cut. We think the curd is more likely to be spongy
in consequence of the continued or frequent agitation kept up to prevent
the cream from rising. All know that a stir too much after the milk
begins to look thick, and roll heavily, prevents the formation of a
solid curd. It refuses to unite in one uniform mass, and remains in
small, separate particles. But, when the milk is all right, observation
will show that such a curd makes fine cheese, though there is great
waste from the fine particles floating off with the whey. And why will
it make fine cheese? Because it is in small particles, gets thoroughly
and evenly cooked, and the butter is equally distributed through it.

But the difficulty of preventing the cream from rising and forming a
cream-curd, that will float on the whey, if it does not waste, needs to
be overcome before we can allow the milk perfect rest after
incorporating the rennet. We are not aware of any method for
accomplishing this. Agitation of the surface, at least, seems necessary
to retain the cream; but if the surface only is agitated, manifestly the
cream will escape from the bottom of the mass and impoverish it while
enriching the top. A thorough stirring of the whole mass, therefore,
will keep the cream more equally distributed, and it will also secure a
greater uniformity of temperature. The cheese must be of evener texture
than if made of curd of different degrees of richness mixed together.

It is a question for debate as to whether the cream which rises on milk
is thoroughly incorporated with it by stirring. That butter is wasted in
making cheese, is a fact that cannot be denied. Some think that nearly
all the cream that rises on the vat during the night is floated off in
the whey. We cannot indorse this conclusion, although it is asserted
that where agitators are used, and the cream is thus prevented from
rising, there is a great saving of the butter. But one fact is worth a
thousand fictions in the practical affairs of life, whatever it be in
romance. Cream will mix with the milk by stirring, and go to enrich the
cheese, as is proved in the manufacture of the English Stilton cheese.
In the manufacture of this, the cream of the night's milk is taken off
and added to the morning's milk, which is worked up separately. The
cheese is greatly enriched thereby. How much the waste of butter is
increased, we are unable to say. We know from our own experience, that
skimming the night's milk, instead of stirring in the cream, makes a
marked difference in the yield and quality of the make.

The first thing in setting, when a vat of milk is raised to the proper
temperature, is to add the coloring. This is a strong alkaline
preparation, and must have a tendency to retard the development of the
lactic acid, if it does not combine with it in forming a neutral salt.
If no effect is perceptible, beyond the color it imparts, it is simply
because the quantity is so small. Probably the effect of the alkali in
the annotto is more than counteracted by the acid in the rennet.

Nothing as good as clear whey has been found for soaking rennets. Some
think the acid an advantage in the working of the milk, and others go so
far as to add, in cold weather, a quantity of sharp whey to the milk
along with that in the prepared rennet. This, of course, hastens the
development of acid throughout the mass. But we cannot say that we
approve of doing anything to change the milk, and thus sour the curd
before cooking. We prefer to have the milk as sweet as possible when
set, and to keep the curd sweet until it is cooked. Then we would
develop the acid in the whey. For this reason, if sour whey is to be
added, we should add it after the curd is cooked, for the purpose of
hastening the development of the lactic acid in the whey. This seems to
us to be the most rational course, from what our experience has taught
us. If fair experiment should demonstrate that we are in error as to
when and where the development of the acid should take place, we shall
be willing to yield the point.

The amount of prepared rennet that it is necessary to add to the milk,
depends upon its strength, which can be determined only by experiment.
Sufficient should be used to coagulate the milk in ten or fifteen
minutes, and render it fit to cut in thirty or forty minutes. If the
milk is "old," the same quantity of rennet will cause it to work sooner,
as it should. Some would add less rennet. We would not. The milk needs
to work faster, and the acid, although it coagulates the milk, will not
supply the place of the rennet. The rennet ought to be strong enough to
require not more than a quart to a thousand pounds of milk.




CHAPTER XIV.

CUTTING CURDS.


Cheese-making was once carried on without cutting the curd; and even
since the introduction of the factory system, there have been those who
denounced the idea of using a cutting instrument. Breaking up the curd
with the hands was considered the better method as incurring less waste,
both of butter and cheese. Such ideas, though entertained but a few
years ago, are obsolete. Cutting curds is now universal, certainly in
America. The only questions are as to the time, manner and extent of
cutting.

When should the curd be cut? Practically, there is little difference of
opinion on this question. Some may cut a little sooner or later than
others, and even the same person may not always be precise as to the
time of cutting. But all will agree that a curd should not be cut before
it is firm enough to break square and smooth over the finger without
whitening the whey; and they will also agree that it should be cut
before it gets tough enough to drive along ahead of the knife. We would
cut it as soon as it can be done without waste, while the curd is
tender; and we would do all the cutting at once. There is no sense in
running the knife through the curd one way, and then letting the curd
stand and toughen before cross-cutting and completing the operation. If
it is fit to partly cut, it is fit to wholly cut; and the sooner the
cutting is done with, the better. Time for the separation of the whey
can be given after the cutting is done, and before the heat is further
raised.

The cutting should be done as carefully as possible and as evenly as
possible. The fewer the motions, the better. If it could be done
instantaneously and uniformly, without agitation, it would be an
advantage. At the right time, we would like to have the entire vat of
curd instantaneously separated into pieces of uniform size. This is the
end to be aimed at. We are far from reaching it with present appliances.
We can only approximate it as nearly as possible. A knife, therefore,
with blades near together is preferable to one with blades farther
apart.

As to the extent of the cutting, there is more difference of opinion,
though the difference has much diminished since the mania for coarse
curds ran its course. A few yet cling to this exploded notion; but the
great majority choose a medium degree of fineness. It has been found
that the large pieces do not sufficiently cook, especially if the milk
is old enough to work quick. The consequence is an uneven texture, and a
deteriorated flavor. Sufficient whey remains in the centers of the large
lumps to ferment and give the cheese the smell of the whey-vat, if it
does not sour and cause the cheese to become leaky and dry. Possibly, if
the weather be favorable for curing, the whey may collect in pungent
drops throughout the cheese, showing themselves when cut somewhat as
they do in the Limburger. Such cheese, we think, is likely to ultimately
approximate the Limburger in both odor and flavor. It will please some
tastes, but will not answer for the best markets.

Medium curds are now the rule. As cheese-makers have approximated fine
curds, they have improved the quality of their cheese. We believe still
finer cutting will prove a further advantage. We will give our reasons
for thinking so, and will add that our experience, as far as it goes,
corroborates the idea. It secures a more uniform action of the heat and
separation of the whey, and therefore an evener texture and better
flavor, with correspondingly improved keeping qualities.

What is the object and advantage of cutting at all? Why not let the curd
remain in one unbroken mass? We cut the curd for the purpose of
facilitating the separation of the fluids from the solids by the
combined action of the rennet and heat. Is it not desirable that this
action should be uniform on every particle of curd? We think this
question will be generally answered in the affirmative. If so, then it
must be conceded that the finer the curd is cut the more nearly the
desired result will be attained. If it could be separated particle from
particle, without waste, would not the action of the heat and rennet be
more perfect still? When in lumps, the externals of them must
necessarily be cooked more than the centers, and the evil of
over-cooking--if there is such an evil with a blood heat temperature--is
illy counteracted by the mixture of curd cooked to different
degrees--some overdone and some underdone. It should all be cooked
alike, to whatever degree the cooking may be carried. This will secure
uniformity of texture and quality, and also clean flavor, if the cooking
is complete.

But, of course, in cutting a curd fine there is danger of waste--waste
of curd, but not necessarily waste of butter, unless the curd is sour.
Then it is impossible to avoid waste of butter by any process that we
are aware of--and with a sour curd there is all the more necessity for
cutting fine and cooking rapidly and thoroughly. With proper care, the
evil of sour milk can be avoided. With good sweet milk and proper
management, there is very little danger of waste of any kind, cut as
fine as we can with the common knife.

We would cut so that the pieces when cooked should not be larger than
kernels of corn; and though many object to it, we should not, if the
pieces were as small as buckwheat--and as regular in size. We would not
use a knife with the blades more than a quarter of an inch apart. Though
we have never used a knife for cutting horizontally, the idea commends
itself to our judgment. We would carefully cut first with the horizontal
knife, leaving the thin slabs of curd lying one upon the other. Then,
without waiting for the whey to rise or the curd to sink, we would use
the perpendicular blades lengthwise of the vat, reducing the slabs to
long square strips, and follow this with the cross-cutting until the
pieces were at least as small as beechnuts. After this, the curd may be
allowed to stand a few minutes, for the whey to separate, before
starting the heat--provided the milk is sweet enough to permit of delay.
But if the milk should give any indication of being old, we would begin
at once to gradually raise the heat; if quite old and changed, we would
crowd the heat as fast as practicable.

To sum up in brief, we would cut a curd and complete the cutting as soon
as it can be done without waste; we would cut it as expeditiously as
possible and with as few motions; we would cut it as fine as care
against waste would warrant; we would raise the heat as gradually and
evenly as circumstances would permit; we would cook as thoroughly and as
evenly as possible; we would keep up the heat until the curd is done; we
would then let the acid develop in the whey until it is plainly changed;
we would dip as warm as convenient, drain and salt, cool to at least
80°, and then put to press. With good milk, good rennet and a good
place to cure the cheese in, we should expect in this way to turn out a
tip-top article.




CHAPTER XV.

HEAT.


One of the most important elements in cheese-making is heat; but we do
not believe the importance of its proper regulation is sufficiently
understood by our cheese-makers. We are aware that cheese can be made
without the use of artificial heat. It is not such an article, however,
as would meet with a ready sale, or be likely to increase the
consumptive demand for cheese. A good-keeping, mild and nutty-flavored
cheese cannot readily be produced, if at all, with a temperature lower
than 96°; nor can a rich, buttery article be made with a temperature
over 102°. We consider 6° the widest allowable range of heat, and think
98° to 100°, or full blood-heat, the best temperature.

Evenness and steadiness of temperature are two important points. That
apparatus is best which heats the milk throughout the vat the most
evenly--leaves it the freest from hot places and cold places, at the
sides, ends, or on the bottom. A perfect apparatus would raise the
temperature of every particle of milk at the same time and at the same
rate; and retain this perfectly even heat at the desired point until the
cooking is completed.

The difficulty, with most or all heating apparatus, is to raise the heat
of the entire mass to the required temperature, without submitting some
particles to a greater degree of heat than is necessary, or heating them
in advance of the rest, to be stirred in and partially cooled again.

We believe that an even cook or scald is of the utmost importance, and
that everything that can be should be done to secure that end. If
thoroughly accomplished, with sweet milk to begin with, we have no fears
as to the richness, fine flavor and good keeping qualities of the
cheese. There is no other thing, in our opinion, which will go so far
toward securing these three desirable qualities.

Another thing, as before indicated, we consider of great importance in
securing a thorough cooking and proper separation of the whey from the
curd. We refer to steadiness of temperature. It seems to us a great
mistake, when the temperature is once up, to not keep it there, without
rising or lowering. It seems a misapplication of terms to speak of
cooking or scalding at a temperature of 98 or 100 degrees; yet, we all
know that blood-heat is all that is required for cheese-making. This
heat seems necessary. Perhaps it is because nature designed the gastric
juice from the rennet to operate at the temperature. It is a well
established fact that digestion will not go on when the temperature of
the stomach is below that of blood-heat. We presume a much higher
temperature is equally detrimental. This may account for the fact that
blood-heat is the best for cheese-making, as at that temperature the
rennet is most active. Be this as it may, we are satisfied that the
process is retarded and the curd deteriorated by allowing the
temperature to fall during the time it is in the scald. Instead of
cooking, and condensing, as it should, in order to expel the whey, it is
only soaking and souring. The moment the acid is sufficiently developed,
though the curd be yet soft and raw, the whey is drawn, the curd is
further cooled and soaked, and then dipped, drained, salted and put to
press. A leaky cheese is the result. If the weather is cool and bad for
curing, a sour cheese follows. But whatever the weather may be, we doubt
if a leaky cheese ever yet turned out all right in flavor and quality.
It can never have that nutty, new-milk flavor which belongs to cheese
properly cooked. We presume there are those who will differ with us in
opinion, but we should demand the positive evidence of at least four
senses before believing we are wrong.

We say, therefore, raise your temperature gradually and evenly, to full
blood-heat, and there retain it until your curd is ready to dip. Then we
believe it would be an advantage to dip and drain, without cooling more
than what cannot be avoided, and salt warm. But of salting, we will
speak more at length some other time. We are now discussing the question
of heat. Let us give a little every-day illustration. Suppose the
housewife were to put her potatoes for dinner in a kettle of water, run
the heat up to 212°, and then allow it to cool by radiation until the
potatoes are done. What kind of a dish would they make? Or, after she
had cooked her potatoes, suppose she should let them stand and soak
until they are cool enough to handle without danger of burning or
scalding any one. Who would want to eat the watery things? The truth is,
212° is the proper temperature for boiling potatoes, and the sooner and
hotter you can get them out of the water, the better. So, in our
opinion, blood-heat, or 98° to 100°, is the proper temperature for
cooking cheese curd, and that after the curd is done, the sooner and
warmer it is dipped, the better for the curd--the sweeter,
richer-flavored and better grained (not pasty, but more of the
consistency of hard, well-made butter, which shows the batter globules
whole) will be the cheese, and its keeping qualities will be
correspondingly improved. It may be a little more work to cool the curd
in the air, and harder keeping it from packing; but if dipped warm, the
whey will the sooner drain off, and the salt can be the sooner thrown
on, when it will penetrate quicker, season the mass more evenly, and
form a coating to the particles of curd, which will keep them from
packing together.

But whether the curd is cooled before dipping or not, we maintain that
it is a great advantage to keep the temperature up to blood-heat during
the entire process after the heat is once raised. With self-heating
apparatus, this can be done by keeping a very little fire going--just
enough to supply the loss of heat from radiation. Where the heating is
done by running warm water around the milk-vat, a current of the proper
temperature can be kept up. If steam is used, perhaps a small jet can be
kept pouring into the space around the vat. But in all these cases, the
danger is that too high a temperature will have to be kept up at the
point of applying the heat, in order to prevent the temperature of the
whole mass from falling. This is a decided objection, and necessitates a
great deal of stirring, which is only a palliative of and not a remedy
for the evil.

Of course we write with reference to the management of heat with milk
that is sweet and in proper condition for cheese-making. Where it is
"old," or tainted, to begin with, it is necessary to hurry the heat, and
every operation connected with the process of making it up. A higher
temperature and less time will be found to produce a very similar effect
to a lower temperature and more time. But, in all cases, an even, steady
heat should be aimed at and maintained to the end.

We never could quite understand the philosophy of cooking less in the
spring and fall than in the summer. The idea that it makes the cheese
more buttery to dip the curd raw, seems to us very absurd. If there is
any time when a curd needs to be thoroughly cooked, it is when the
weather is cool and unfavorable for curing. If the whey is not properly
expelled by the action of heat, it has got to either dry out or leak
out, or both. If there is too much left in the curd to dry out, long
before it can leak out, your cheese will be sour, with a puckered face,
and sundry ugly cracks. Even when the cheese does not absolutely drip,
if the curd is dipped while underdone, it will sour, the face will have
a corrugated appearance, and the cheese will "try" crumbly and sour. The
color will also be paler than in those that are properly cooked, the
general look will be clammy, and no rind will form that will be
satisfactory. Even when well-cooked and well-made, if a cheese does not
have sufficient warmth, it will sour on the ranges and spoil; and it
stands to reason that cheese made from a curd insufficiently cooked must
work a great deal worse under unfavorable conditions for curing. Our
experience is, that a curd needs more cooking in the spring and fall
than will answer in hot, dry weather. If we must have a curd dipped soft
at any season of the year, we say let it be at that season when the
weather is best for drying and curing. A cheese that would become
worthless on the ranges in cold, wet weather, may turn out pretty fair
in "dog days." But we do not believe in undercooking at any time. Food,
of all kinds, needs as much cooking one season of the year as another.
It is quite likely, however, that a degree or two lower heat will answer
in cool weather, for the reason that milk keeps better then, and the
curd remains longer in the scald before taking on acid. In this case, we
have a lower heat for a longer time, which will produce the same result
as a higher heat for a shorter time. But in both cases the curd ought to
be cooked the same. Whatever degree of heat is decided upon, let it be
kept up, steady and uniform throughout the mass, and at all seasons of
the year let the curd be cooked done. This is specially important when
the conditions for curing are unfavorable. You must do, then, in the vat
part of the work which can be done on the ranges when the weather is
favorable.




CHAPTER XVI.

ACID.


Another important agent in cheese-making is acid. This you are pretty
sure to have, at some stage of the process, and the chief question seems
to be as to _when_ you will have it. It is said that milk fresh from the
cow manifests the presence of lactic acid. The quantity is very slight,
however, and under favorable circumstances the development is slow.
Where milk is properly cooled immediately after being taken from the
cow, and the factoryman has good facilities for keeping it cool, it will
be found, when the time comes to begin the process of working up, what
is called "sweet." It will not taste as fresh and clean as when first
cooled after milking; but no acid will be perceptible to either taste or
smell--not even enough to make it what is termed "old."

Some think age makes the milk all the better for cheese-making, and we
believe it is generally understood that milk fresh from the cow does not
work quite satisfactorily. However, we place no great stress on this
opinion. Old milk will work quicker than new milk; the acid will develop
sooner to the point desired by the cheese-maker, and this saving of time
doubtless has something to do with the decision in favor of age in milk
for the purpose of cheese-making.

Our impression is, that milk cannot be too sweet when the rennet is
added, and that if sufficient time is taken to develop the acid in the
whey before dipping, the fresh milk will be found to turn out the
finest-flavored and best-keeping cheese. The acid is not wanted in the
_curd_, but in the _whey_. If the milk is sour, to begin with, or quite
advanced toward sourness, the lactic acid must pervade every particle of
the whole mass. Now, it strikes us that the correct idea is to expel the
whey from the curd, as far as possible, before the acid makes its
appearance, and let the acid develop in the whey afterward, so as to
furnish a sort of pickle. The acid will develop sharply at some stage in
the process; and, as we have before said, the question to be decided
seems to be as to what point it is best to have it develop at.

We say, with the light we at present have before us, we think the acid
should never be allowed to develop much before the curd is cooked and
the whey is properly expelled; then let the whey take on acid to quite a
perceptible degree before dipping the curd. We doubt if it makes much
difference whether the acidulation takes place while the curd is
floating in the whey, or after the whey is drawn off and while the curd
stands and drains. There is rather more convenience in handling to leave
the whey on and stir the curd sufficiently to keep it from packing; but
the "cheddar" cheese, which is generally considered the best of any, is
made by stacking the curd, after cooking, and allowing the whey that
clings to it to take on acid. But where the milk is all right, to begin
with, and the curd is properly managed and cooked, we doubt if it makes
any material difference which process is adopted for allowing the acid
to develop. With such a curd, there is little danger of its being
injured by the acid, as any one can demonstrate by allowing curd to
stand unpressed over night, as is often done with small remnants, when
the pieces will be found covered with an almost vinegar-sour acid. Grind
this curd and put it to press, and there will be no signs of sour
cheese.

The development of the acid is absolutely necessary to secure good
keeping qualities and a mild, clean flavor. Dip a curd before the whey
has become perceptibly acid, or is on the verge of "changing," and we
think that a rank, bitter flavor will be sure to follow. The absence of
sufficient lactic acid leaves the albumen in a condition likely to
decompose, while the butyric acid develops itself, as in rancid butter,
and the two combine to make a very unpalatable flavor to one nice about
the taste of his cheese. Some prefer strong cheese. To such, the nearer
the flavor approaches that of smoked herring and tobacco, the greater
the gustatory gratification.

The principal difficulty in working up sour milk is to get sufficient
action of the rennet and heat on the curd to properly condense it and
expel the whey. It is a mistake, therefore, to dip a curd soft because
it is sour. Run your heat up to 104° or even 106°, as soon as possible,
and keep it there until your curd is cooked. It is sour, and nothing but
cooking will save it, if anything will. The whey must and will come out.
If you do not expel it from the particles of curd in the vat, you will
not be able to press it out sufficiently to keep it from working and
leaking out while the cheese stands on the ranges.

If anything will prevent sour milk from making leaky cheese, it is
thorough cooking. This process you should hurry up as much as
possible--always having an eye to keeping the heat even, and preventing
waste of butter. The acid, acting on the butter globules, makes their
coatings tender. Therefore, handle the curd as carefully as possible,
cool well before putting to press, and press gently, increasing the
pressure gradually. But, if you have succeeded in getting your curd
properly cooked, you have done one of the best things possible to
retain the butter. If, when you put the curd to press, you find you have
more than the usual bulk of curd, filling the hoops fuller and refusing
to yield readily to the pressure of the screw--as is generally the case
with sour milk, as managed in most factories--you may know that you have
not done your work thoroughly, and therefore look out for leaky, sour,
poor cheese. On the other hand, if you have condensed the curd to the
usual bulk, so that it works well under the screw, you may hope for a
fair cheese, that may pass muster when the buyer comes along.

We often hear the remark, when anything is said about developing the
acid, "No sour cheese for me; I prefer to dip my curd sweet." People who
talk in this way either make bitter, bad-flavored cheese, or else get on
more acid than they are aware of, in consequence of having dull taste
and smell. They judge by the _appearance_ and _feel_ of the curd when it
is in condition to dip, and may succeed in hitting the right point. In
hot weather, it is hardly possible not to develop the acid sufficiently.
But if they really dip the curd sweet, we do not believe it possible
that their cheese can be up to the standard demanded by the best
markets, though they may succeed in getting a fair price for it. Not all
buyers are really good judges, and fewer still know what the matter is
with a cheese that is imperfectly made. They know, perhaps, that there
is something wrong about it; but what, they are unable to say. Further,
we believe the average price of American cheese lower than it should be,
in consequence of so little really prime cheese, and of the large amount
of second-rate; and that, as yet, our buyers are not sufficiently
discriminating in their purchases and prices, though they are yearly
growing more so. Both buyers and cheese-makers need more experience and
a better understanding of what is requisite in the manufacture of a
prime article.




CHAPTER XVII.

DIPPING CURDS.


There is nothing so difficult in cheese-making as to determine the exact
point when a curd ought to be taken out of the vat and salted. A slight
variation either way from this point makes an uneven lot of cheese, and
much variation spoils the batch, so that it will not pass for "prime."
Every cheese-maker has felt the want of some test whereby the exact
point, when a curd is sufficiently "done" to dip, can be determined with
certainty. Neither the sense of smell, the sense of taste, nor the sense
of touch is infallible. The evidence of this fact can be seen in any
factory during the season of cheese-making. A simple test of acidity,
which is claimed to be conclusive, is the application of a hot iron to a
lump of curd. The iron wants to be searing hot--not red hot, but hot
enough to toast cheese. Take up a small handful of curd, squeeze the
whey out of it, and touch the hot iron to it, holding it there for a
moment, or until it adheres and begins to melt or toast the cheese. Then
pull the iron gently away from the curd. If the curd is raw and sweet,
it will break short off from the iron and appear crumbly. If slightly
acid, it will slightly pull out in threads, but not very long ones. As
the acid develops, the stringiness increases. At a certain point, the
curd will cling to the iron and pull out in numerous fine threads an
inch or two long. Beyond this point, the threads grow longer but fewer,
until there will be only one, which will draw out a foot or so, and then
break, recoiling somewhat like India-rubber. Indeed, the curd grows
tougher and more stringy from the time it begins to take on acid
perceptibly, until it finally ends in stringing indefinitely, like wax,
having passed the point of breaking and flying back. The successive
stages of development are gradual, but very marked, and cannot fail to
be recognized after a few experiments.

Thus having obtained a means of telling the degree of acid developed, it
only remains to be decided at what point to dip the curd. It is claimed
that the proper one is where the threads are the finest and most
numerous. Beyond this point, the threads diminish in number but increase
in length, which is an indication of too much acid. It is asserted that
the hot iron test is uniform and reliable, besides being easy of
application. Cheese-makers can make their own experiments, and we advise
them to try the hot iron to their own satisfaction. If it should prove
as conclusive as good judges think it will, it will be of immense value
to our dairymen.

This test reminds us of the test used by maple-sugar makers to determine
when the batch has reached the point where it will "grain" and "cake"
well. They make a small bow of a twig, dip it into the sugar, which
adheres to and fills it, and then they blow through the bow. If no
bubble forms and floats off like a soap-bubble, the batch is not done.
But if they can blow a string of bubbles, or one long bubble, it is time
to remove the heat. The stringing of the cheese-curd, on the application
of the hot iron, seems to afford a very similar test for the
cheese-maker.

It is not claimed that the use of the hot iron will necessarily insure
the making of good cheese. It only determines the degree of acidity,
which is one very important point. Other things are requisite to the
manufacture of a prime article, and the same care, attention, and
labor, in other matters, will remain just as essential. By using the hot
iron, however, it is claimed that the cheese-maker can tell, every time,
just how sour his curd is.




CHAPTER XVIII.

SALTING CURDS.


We believe there is not much controversy on the question of salting
curd. One says, salt it hot, and another says, cool it first. But the
variation in temperature is but a few degrees, and can hardly be
supposed to have much effect. On the whole, we prefer salting as warm as
practicable, as the curd then takes the salt better and the seasoning is
likely to be evener. But the sooner the salt is thrown on, the greater
the waste will be from running off in the whey. If the curd were
thoroughly drained, or pressed out, as it is by the English in the
manufacture of cheddar cheese, before the salt is added, considerable
less would be needed. Some salt the curd in the vat, while it is yet
covered with whey, and think this the better way. We opine, however, it
matters but little when the salt is added, if it be distributed evenly
throughout the mass of curd and is used in the proper quantity. The
common method is to salt in the curd-sink, while the curd is
draining--generally as soon after it is dipped as it can be stirred into
a loose condition suitable for evenly mixing the salt.

We have heard the opinion expressed that it matters not whether the curd
is well separated after salting, or left in coarse chunks with the salt
adhering to their surfaces when put to press, as salt is very
penetrating and the pressing drives the salt whey all through the
cheese. But the common practice is not based on such a conclusion, and
we think it well that it is not. Even salting we consider as essential
in cheese-making as in butter-making.

The amount of salt used at the different factories varies from four
ounces to five ounces for a hundred pounds of milk, or from two pounds
and a half to three pounds and an eighth for a thousand pounds of milk,
or a hundred pounds of curd. The higher rate of salting is thought to
somewhat retard the curing, but it will help the keeping qualities of
the cheese.

For convenience sake, and to save time and the liability to mistakes
when in a hurry, we would recommend the making of a scale or table,
based on the rate of salting adopted, ranging from twenty or twenty-five
pounds up to a hundred, and then for the hundreds up to the capacity of
the vat. It takes but a little while, during some leisure hour, to make
such a tabular scale. When made and stuck up in some convenient
place--say, over the salt barrel, or over the balances--it will enable
any one not familiar with or quick in figures to see at a glance how
much salt is needed for the curd of a given amount of milk. It is a
convenience, too, that will last as long as the factory, if taken care
of.


For the benefit of whom it may concern, we give the following tables:


TABLE

FOR SALTING AT THE RATE OF 2 LBS. 8 OZS. TO 1,000 LBS. OF MILK.


     -----------+---------------++---------+---------------
         MILK.  |     SALT.     ||   MILK. |     SALT.
     -----------+-------+-------++---------+-------+-------
         lbs.   |  lbs. |  ozs. ||   lbs.  |  lbs. |  ozs.
          25    |   0   |   1   ||  1,000  |    2  |   8
          50    |   0   |   2   ||  2,000  |    5  |   0
          75    |   0   |   3   ||  3,000  |    7  |   8
         100    |   0   |   4   ||  4,000  |   10  |   0
         200    |   0   |   8   ||  5,000  |   12  |   8
         300    |   0   |  12   ||  6,000  |   15  |   0
         400    |   1   |   0   ||  7,000  |   17  |   8
         500    |   1   |   4   ||  8,000  |   20  |   0
         600    |   1   |   8   ||  9,000  |   22  |   8
         700    |   1   |  12   ||         |       |
         800    |   2   |   0   ||         |       |
         900    |   2   |   4   ||         |       |
     -----------+-------+-------++---------+-------+-------


TABLE

FOR SALTING AT THE RATE OF 3 LBS. 2 OZS. TO 1,000 LBS. OF MILK.


     -----------+---------------++---------+---------------
         MILK.  |     SALT.     ||   MILK. |     SALT.
     -----------+-------+-------++---------+-------+-------
         lbs.   |  lbs. |  ozs. ||   lbs.  |  lbs. |  ozs.
          20    |   0   |   1   ||  1,000  |   3   |    2
          40    |   0   |   2   ||  2,000  |   6   |    4
          60    |   0   |   3   ||  3,000  |   9   |    6
          80    |   0   |   4   ||  4,000  |  12   |    8
         100    |   0   |   5   ||  5,000  |  15   |   10
         200    |   0   |  10   ||  6,000  |  18   |   12
         300    |   0   |  15   ||  7,000  |  21   |   14
         400    |   1   |   4   ||  8,000  |  25   |    0
         500    |   1   |   9   ||  9,000  |  28   |    2
         600    |   1   |  14   ||         |       |
         700    |   2   |   3   ||         |       |
         800    |   2   |   8   ||         |       |
         900    |   2   |  13   ||         |       |
     -----------+-------+-------++---------+-------+-------


We presume the method of using these tables will be plain enough to
most cheese-makers. But we will give a single illustration. Supposing
the batch of milk to be 4,640 pounds, if we wish to salt at the rate of
3 lbs. 2 ozs. to the 1,000 pounds of milk, we look at the column
indicating the quantity of salt for a given number of thousands, and
find that 4,000 pounds of milk require 12 lbs. 8 ozs. of salt. Referring
to the other column, we find 400 pounds of milk require 1 lb. 4 ozs.
salt, and 40 pounds, 2 ozs. Add these together, and we have 13 lbs. 14
ozs. as the quantity of salt required for 4,640 lbs. of milk. If
desired, a table can be made out, with little trouble, that will show
the quantity of salt required for any given number of hundreds of pounds
of milk likely to be contained in a single vat.




CHAPTER XIX.

TAINTED MILK.


The most abominable of all things in a cheese-factory is tainted milk.
It means floating curds, "huffy" cheese, bad flavor and poor prices.
Yet, as milk is now managed, most factories will, in hot weather, get
occasionally caught with a mess of tainted milk. There are hard work,
anxiety and unsatisfactory results in it for the cheese-maker, and
dissatisfaction and small profits for the patron. Such things never
ought to be; but, when such a catastrophe happens, like other
disagreeable things, it has to be borne and the best made of it that
circumstances will permit.

We know of no way to make good cheese out of tainted milk, and have had
comparatively little experience with it--though quite as much as we
desire. But from our own knowledge and what we can learn from the
experience of others, if we had a tainted mess of milk to work up, we
should heat it up as soon as possible, cut the curd fine, cook it
thoroughly and develop the acid as much as we thought the curd would
bear and stick together so as to bandage well. If we had another batch,
in which the whey was all right, we would draw off the whey from the
tainted batch as early as possible and add whey from the sweet batch to
the tainted curd, to cook it in. If not, as soon as cooked, we would
draw off the whey and allow the acid to develop in the curd. We presume
sour whey added to the batch would be an advantage in developing the
acid, and acid is what seems to be needed to check the decomposition and
further tainting of the curd. An extra quantity of salt would doubtless
be an advantage in stopping further taint. The curd should be cooled to
the temperature of the atmosphere, and well aired before being put to
press, and the pressing should be thorough.

Old cheese-makers have told us that they thought they found an advantage
in washing and cooling a tainted curd with ice water--that is, by
chilling it. It seems to us that, though this might check taint for the
time being, it would hasten it when the cheese warmed up in curing, as
butter or meat will spoil rapidly after having come in contact with ice,
if exposed to the atmosphere.

Prime cheese never can be made of bad milk. But, if milk is not too
badly tainted, a mess managed on the principles we have indicated will
make a fair cheese--one that will suit many palates. A curd made of sour
milk may be improved by washing out some of the acid by the use of warm
water. With such a curd, extra cooking is an important point; but
generally there is less cooking, owing to the hurry to get the curd out
of the sour whey. It is in almost the opposite condition, so far as acid
is concerned, of curd made from tainted milk. The latter has too little
acid; the former too much. We therefore want to develop the acid in a
tainted curd, and to retard or diminish it in a sour one.




CHAPTER XX.

CURING.


There is no part of the process of making up milk and getting the
product ready for market which requires more care and judgment, as well
as some hard work, than curing. Few rooms are properly prepared for the
purpose. They are left too open and barn-like, with no means of
controlling the temperature. Factorymen generally seem to think that if
the cheese is only made and put on the ranges, there is little or no
need of making any further provision. We have seen cheese, which we
believe had deteriorated from one to two cents a pound in value, because
the curing process had not gone on properly. The curing rooms were full
of cracks which let in the wind, cold or hot, dry or damp, as it might
be, and the cheese stood on the ranges in the cold, damp atmosphere,
turning to swill--to hog feed, instead of human food. The faces were
cracked; the flavor was bad; "too much acid," the buyers said; the
makers were perplexed, and quite sure they had not changed their hands
from what they were when they made a good reputation; the patrons were
dissatisfied, and the committeemen grumbled. There might have been other
failings; but we are quite sure that no one has a right to expect prime
cheese where there are not the proper facilities for curing. If the
weather happens to be right, a barn may answer the purpose. But no one
has a right to presume on always having favorable weather; and it is the
part of wisdom to make preparations for all sorts of contingencies.

A curing-room should be made with a wind-proof wall. This would guard
against sudden changes of weather, by keeping out both heat and cold.
Sufficient air can be introduced through the windows, which should be
made to open easily, and be provided with blinds. There should also be
provision for supplying artificial heat, equally distributed throughout
the building, and not from a red-hot stove set in the middle, or in one
end or corner, where it will toast the cheeses near it, and leave those
farther off to chill in the cold weather of spring and fall. If steam is
used, the heating apparatus may be made to do the double work of cooking
the curd, and warming the drying-room. This may be done by means of
hot-air tubes, or by the use of steam-pipes running round the room. Of
course it would cost a little at the beginning; but a curing room once
properly fitted up would soon pay the extra expense in the saving of
time, labor, care, vexation and money. A thousand and one annoyances
would be guarded against, and the proprietor would have the satisfaction
of knowing that he had got a good thing, which would insure the most
that could be expected from the product of the cheese-vat, and build up
a first-class reputation and a permanent business.

A curing-room should not only be kept at an equable temperature of 70°
to 80°, but be well ventilated. The gases constantly emitted by the
curing process should have a chance to freely escape and leave the
atmosphere as pure and sweet as possible. There is no more sense in
supposing that a cheese can cure properly and have a clean, wholesome
flavor, if kept in a close, unventilated room, than that a human being
can retain his health in impure air. The curing-room must be kept clean
and sweet, dry and airy--not by allowing the wind to whistle through it
as it listeth, but by a judicious system of heating and ventilating,
which will allow the hot and chill blasts to blow harmlessly by.




CHAPTER XXI.

GREASING CHEESE.


When a cheese is first removed from the hoops, care should be taken that
its face be not allowed to dry and crack before it is greased with hot
whey-butter. Nothing has been found so good as whey-butter for the
purpose of greasing cheese, and it should be applied hot, and as soon
after the cheese is set on the range as possible. If it dries at all, we
think it injurious to the formation of a smooth, glassy face; and if it
dries much, the face is sure to check and present an unsatisfactory
appearance, besides furnishing convenient places for the cheese-fly to
deposit its eggs.

A very convenient thing for applying the hot butter is a paint-brush. It
is much handier and better every way than a swab. But care must be
taken, or the bristles of the brush will get scorched. This can be
avoided by removing the brush from the dish when through using it, and
not putting it in the grease again until you are ready to grease the
faces of your cheeses.

A pressed iron dish with a handle riveted on, is handy for melting the
grease. There is no danger of melting out the bottom, or melting off the
handle, and you are less liable to burn yourself or spill your grease
than you are if you melt the whey butter in an old basin, which very
soon gets burnt and leaky.

Little conveniences, like the iron dish and brush we have mentioned,
help a great deal, in the course of a season, about cheese-making; and a
cheese-maker had better furnish them at his own expense, if his
employers are too stingy to do it, than not to have them. There are
many such little things that greatly assist in doing work easily and in
keeping neat and tidy. One can do without them, on the principle that a
farmer can hoe his corn without a cultivator, but it does not pay.

If a cheese cannot be greased as soon as taken out, spread a cloth or
put a turner over it, or both. This will keep the moisture from escaping
and the air from immediate contact with the face of the cheese.

As whey-butter is the best and nearly the only material used for
greasing the faces of cheeses, it will not be amiss and may be of use to
inexperienced cheese-makers, to say a few words on the mode of trying
out the whey-butter. Prepare a skimmer with a long handle, which may be
cheaply made by punching the bottom of an old tin-pan full of holes and
fastening a wooden handle to it with bits of wire. A shrub five or six
feet long and of suitable size, with a short crook at the larger end, is
convenient. It can be split at the crooked end, slipped on the edge of
the pan and wired there without much trouble.

Hang a large kettle--a cauldron is best--in a convenient place, and fill
it about two-thirds fall of the grease and scum which you skim off from
the vat. It is yeasty stuff, and requires a good deal of room, at first,
to swell in when the heat is started. Keep up a moderate fire, so as to
boil it gently without scorching, and continue the boiling until the
cheesy portion is sufficiently cooked to sink to the bottom. Then allow
the batch to rest and cool down. Dip off the butter, while still warm
and oily, and carefully strain it into a clean tub. When cooled
sufficiently to begin to thicken somewhat, a little salt sprinkled on
the surface and thoroughly stirred in, as the farmers' wives sometimes
salt their lard, will help prevent it from getting rancid and stinking.
Set it in a cool place, and keep it covered tightly. Near the close of
the fall's operations, a nice tub of whey butter should be thus prepared
and set by for use the next spring--for, in the cold spring weather,
when cheese-making first commences, very little cream will rise on the
whey-vat, and it will take some time before a batch can be procured.

In applying the whey-butter to the face of the cheese, no more should be
used than the surface of the cheese will absorb and leave it moist and
shiny. If enough is put on so that it will cool in streaks and stick to
whatever it touches, it should be wiped off, or it will daub the turner
or bench, and not only make unnecessary work in cleaning, but prevent a
hard, smooth rind from forming. Many give themselves a good deal of
annoyance by putting on too much grease.

The next morning after the cheese has been set on the range, and had its
upper face greased with hot whey-butter, it should be turned over, when
a similar application of hot butter should be made to the other face. If
the cheese is well made and of good milk, and properly greased, as we
have indicated, more greasing will seldom be needed. A little care will
determine when more is needed, if at all. If the face begins to look dry
and feel harsh, in spite of thorough rubbing with the hands, call the
grease-brush into requisition again. In hot, dry weather--especially if
the air is allowed to strike the face of the cheese--a timely
application of more whey-butter may keep the face from cracking and save
considerable trouble.

The cheeses should be regularly turned, for the first fortnight, every
day, and have their faces thoroughly rubbed and polished with the naked
hand. Nothing else will do so much to help form a satisfactory rind. A
cloth carried along should be used to wipe off any surplus grease on the
bench or turner, so as to prevent its daubing the next cheese and making
additional work. This same cloth, thus made greasy, will answer the
additional use of wiping off any mould that may be found collecting on
the bandage.

In this way, a lot of cheese, with comparatively little additional work
and trouble, but a trifle more attention, can be kept looking clean and
wholesome; and if this neatness does not actually help improve the
quality of the cheese--we think it does--it will so much improve the
appearance, that you will not only be rewarded by the satisfaction
afforded, but can safely count on a fraction more from the buyer--enough
to more than pay for all the labor bestowed in curing.




CHAPTER XXII.

SKIPPERS.


One of the most annoying things in the drying-room is the cheese-fly. It
is very small but very effective in its way; and as it has the power to
so rapidly increase its numbers, it sometimes gives a good deal of
trouble. To a beginner, its ways seem almost past finding out, yet its
path often becomes disgustingly visible.

We know of no sovereign remedy for these pests of the drying-room. The
best preventive is perfect cleanliness in all the surroundings. No pools
of whey or slops of any kind in, under or around the building, should be
allowed to furnish the first broods. But few factories are so arranged
as to leave no putrid whey-spouts or other receptacles for the eggs of
the fly. When hot weather comes on, the flies, therefore, swarm all
around the building; and most curing-rooms are so open as to afford them
easy access. Once in the room, the trouble and warfare begin, and cease
not until the dog-star no longer rages.

The cheese-fly is not very particular where it deposits its
eggs--whether in the cracks in the benches or turners, in wrinkles in
the bandage, in the checks in the rind of the cheese, or on the smooth
face. If the weather is warm enough and there is the least bit of
moisture, the eggs will hatch anywhere around the cheese. As soon as
hatched, instinct leads the skipper to burrow in the cheese at once. It
is a mistaken idea, we think, that the fly inserts the eggs. It drops
them in clusters, wherever it is convenient. It may be on a turner,
which is standing idle. It is taken up thoughtlessly, clapped over a
cheese, which is turned on it, nicely covering the eggs, which hatch
between it and the rind, and the brood is soon found thriving nicely in
the cheese. Perhaps the eggs are laid on the smooth face of the cheese,
in plain sight, if one looks carefully enough for them. The next time
the cheese is turned, the eggs are in the same situation as those laid
on the turner. They may be laid on the bench, and the cheese set on
them. A careful hand, who is used to hunting eggs as well as skippers,
will look closely for them everywhere, and be sure that the face of no
cheese that has them on is turned down, and that no turner is used
containing them. In all these cases, care and neatness have their
advantages, and pay.

If a cheese is leaky, look out for it. We have seen the eggs of the
cheese-fly deposited on the best cheeses; but sour, stinking, leaky
cheeses attract them most. Here they are in their natural element. The
eggs dropped on the moist cheese anywhere, even on the bandage, will do
remarkably well. They no sooner hatch, than the tiny worm works its way
through the bandage or rind into the cheese, and there he feasts,
fattens and grows.

It is almost traditional that a skippery cheese is invariably a good
one. We admit that good cheese may be skippery--it is so, sometimes; but
the leaky, greasy, rank smelling and strong-tasting cheese, is the
skipper's delight. In such a cheese, he luxuriates in all his disgusting
glory.

When skippers get into a cheese, we know of no better way than to dig or
cut them out as soon as possible. Their presence is at once indicated by
a moist spot, when the bottom face of the cheese is first turned up.
Greasing a piece of paper over the hole in the cheese, which is the
entrance of the skipper, will bring him to the surface after air, but it
does not kill him nor free the cheese from skippers. We say, cut them
out. Cut freely, and make sure work. If the spot is near the edge, a
wedge-shaped piece may be cut out, and a piece of another cheese--there
is usually one cut for patrons of a factory--can be fitted in, a second
bandage drawn over, and the cheese slipped into a hoop, when a little
pressing will smooth down all roughness and heal all scars.

Some put cayenne pepper in whey-butter used for greasing cheeses. But,
though it may help keep flies off, it will not prevent trouble. They
will work their way wherever there is a chance for them. Dryness,
cleanliness and watchful care, are the only sure preventives of
skippers, in hot weather. To one who has had experience, it is not so
very difficult to guard against serious loss from skippery cheese. But
beginners need to be put on their guard--and for their benefit we have
penned this article on skippers.




CHAPTER XXIII.

CHEDDAR PROCESS.


During the summer of 1869, we had the pleasure of visiting the Spring
Creek and Slate Hill factories, in Montgomery county, under the charge
of Mr. ALEXANDER MACADAM. Mr. MACADAM'S father is an old cheese-maker,
who learned the Cheddar process from the celebrated English dairyman,
Mr. JOSEPH HARDING, of Somerset, about 1855. The son has had all the
advantages of the father's experience, and, in addition to an active,
inquiring and practical turn of mind, has had experience in one of the
heaviest cheese houses in London. If any one knows what good cheese is,
and what is required by the English taste, as well as by the American
market, we think Mr. ALEXANDER MACADAM does. He is, besides,
intelligent, free and communicative--ready to impart any information
within his knowledge. We propose to give as intelligible an account of
his process as we were able to pick up in our brief visit. But, as he
adopts in part the American method, and humors considerably American
ideas, we will first give a brief description of the real Cheddar
process, as explained in a pamphlet written by Mr. ROBERT MACADAM, of
Gorsty Hill Dairy, Crewe, who is the father of our host:


     In describing the process of cheese-making, it is necessary to keep
     in view some definite size of dairy; and for this reason, we will
     allude in the present section to one making cheese from the milk of
     60 cows.

     As detailed in the paragraph on the morning's operations, the
     evening's milk having cooled down to 62°, is lifted and sieved into
     the cheese tub, and the morning's milk added to it, as it comes
     from the cow-house. If the temperature of the milk, when thus
     mixed, be under 78°, it must be raised to that degree of warmth, as
     from 78° to 80° is the best temperature at which milk can be set
     for coagulation. This may be effected either by warming a portion
     of the milk among hot water to any temperature not above 150°, or,
     when the cheese-tub is double-bottomed, by introducing a jet of
     steam, or allowing the hot water to circulate. The quantity of milk
     in the cheese-tub being one hundred and sixty-five gallons, the
     requisite quantity of annotto is now added, and carefully mixed, to
     produce a rich straw or cowslip color. Five quarts of sour whey
     being added, and a quantity of rennet sufficient to coagulate the
     mass of milk in sixty minutes, the whole is gently stirred and
     completely mixed, covered over with a clean cloth, and allowed to
     stand for coagulation. After the milk has stood for fifteen
     minutes, the top or surface should be gently stirred, to prevent
     the cream from ascending, and this must be repeated if the curd is
     long in beginning to form. Hence it is preferable that the
     coagulation should be completed in from fifty to sixty minutes, as
     otherwise a waste of richness is likely to ensue. When the cream
     shows a decided tendency to rise to the surface, it is advisable to
     skim it off, previous to lifting the evening's milk, and warm it to
     a temperature of 95°, as this prevents it from ascending, and
     causes it to amalgamate more completely with the mass of milk set
     for coagulation. In stirring the milk to prevent the cream from
     ascending, the strictest attention should be observed to abstain
     from doing so if the slightest degree of coagulation is perceived.
     As soon as the curd has acquired a moderate degree of firmness, the
     operation of breaking-up should be at once commenced, and must be
     performed carefully, gently and minutely. This may be accomplished
     by one person in about thirty minutes, when the revolving knife
     breaker is employed, or by two persons in about the same time, when
     the shovel or wire-breakers are used. Before this operation is
     finished, a quantity of whey must be taken from the cheese-tub,
     heated to 150°, and again poured upon the mass, stirring being
     actively kept up beneath the stream, to prevent any portion of the
     curd from being scalded. The quantity thus heated must be
     sufficient to raise the temperature of the contents of the
     cheese-tub to 80°, and the whole must be carefully and completely
     mixed. The addition of warm whey raises the temperature, and
     consequently hastens the separation of the whey from the curd, and
     assists in promoting the necessary acidity. [If, however, the
     presence of acidity can be detected by the smell or taste, no warm
     whey should be used at this stage of the process.] The curd being
     broken to a sufficient degree of fineness, it is allowed to remain
     undisturbed for one hour, except when the acid exists in too great
     a degree, in which case it should only stand during the time
     occupied by warming the whey for scalding. The whey-separator is
     then inserted, and the liquid allowed to run off until the surface
     of the curd appears among the whey, after which the separator is
     taken out, and the curd properly broken up with the shovel-breaker.
     But before breaking up the curd, a quantity of whey should be
     heated to 150°, for the purpose of scalding it. One person pours a
     portion of this hot whey over the curd, while another stirs
     actively beneath the stream with a shovel-breaker. The hot whey is
     poured cautiously over the mass at intervals, and the stirring is
     kept up gently but briskly, until the temperature is raised
     gradually to 98° or 100° Fah. The stirring is continued, and the
     temperature maintained, until the curd acquires a certain degree of
     firmness and consistency, which it is difficult to describe, but
     which the intelligent cheese-maker soon learns to recognize by its
     appearance, and by its peculiarly elastic feel when handled. It is
     therefore of the utmost importance to possess the discrimination
     and tact necessary for discerning when the proper degree of
     firmness and consistency has been attained. When the curd is
     sufficiently "cooked," it is in small granular particles, firm and
     elastic to the touch, and when a portion is taken in the hand and
     squeezed, it does not readily adhere, but separates into particles.
     The stirring must be continued till this peculiar consistency is
     attained, without any regard to the length of time, but should on
     no account be farther prolonged, because the cheese will then have
     a tendency to be hard and stiff, and will require a longer time to
     mature in the cheese-room. The length of time required for stirring
     varies according to the previous condition of the milk, being from
     twenty to thirty minutes when the acid exists in a sufficient
     degree, or even double that time when the natural process of change
     in the milk has been slow. This process of saturating the curd with
     heated whey has the effect of completely separating the solid and
     fluid parts, the only moisture left being that which adheres to the
     particles, and which comes away under pressure. But when the
     temperature is raised in this manner, or by heat from the bottom of
     the cheese-tub, the utmost care is necessary to keep the curd from
     being over-scalded, as, when the temperature is too suddenly
     raised, part of buttraceous matter may be lost, and the small pulpy
     particles get skinned over, inclosing a quantity of the whey, which
     it is extremely difficult again to separate. If the milk has been
     in proper condition to begin with, and the process carried on in
     the manner thus detailed, the curd will retain all the natural
     richness of the milk, and the cheese produced will have that rich
     creamy taste and sweet milky flavor, something like the odor of new
     milk, known as the _Cheddar flavor_. When the curd is raised (in
     the manner described above) to the natural heat of the milk (98°,)
     or only one or two degrees above it, all the butter is retained and
     fixed in the curd; for although subjected even at first to a
     pressure of half a ton, little or no trace of butter will appear.
     This is unquestionably a more rational and far superior method of
     separating the whey from the curd than that of heating beside a
     fire or in a furnace, with its attendant skewerings and changings.

     The next step in the continuation of the process is to insert the
     separator, after the curd has been allowed to remain undisturbed in
     the scald for the space of thirty minutes. After the whey is run
     off, the curd is thrown up into a heap in the center of the
     cheese-tub, covered over with a clean cheese-cloth, and the whey
     allowed to drain away from it for another half-hour. At the end of
     that time the curd is cut across, turned over in square lumps,
     heaped up, covered as before, and then allowed to lie for half an
     hour longer. The curd is then taken from the cheese-tub, laid upon
     a cooler, split by the hand into thin flakes, and spread out to
     cool. The curd at this stage has a distinctly acid smell; it is
     slightly sour, and by no means palatable; and its taste and
     appearance are such as would lead a novice to think it unlikely to
     produce a fine cheese. When the curd has been exposed on the cooler
     for fifteen minutes, it is turned over, and allowed to lie for the
     same length of time. It is then packed into a cheese-vat, having a
     clean cloth under it, placed under the press for the space of ten
     minutes, and subjected to a pressure of half a ton. When taken out,
     it is ground in the mill, weighed, and returned to the cooler, and
     if the acid is sufficiently developed, it should be at once salted,
     cooled down to about 65°, and placed under pressure. The purest
     refined salt should be used, and should be weighed and carefully
     mixed with the mass, one pound of salt being sufficient for
     fifty-six pounds of curd.

     When the acid is found to be insufficiently developed in the
     previous stages of the process, the curd is allowed to lie
     unsalted, and is stirred up occasionally, until the necessary
     degree of acidity is acquired. The curd is then finally put into
     the cheese-vat, and at once put under pressure, at first under a
     weight of five or six cwt. The cheese is taken out of the press in
     the evening, and a clean cloth put upon it, and being turned in the
     vat, is subjected to a pressure of half a ton. Next morning, it is
     again taken out, wrapped in a dry cloth, reversed in the vat, and
     returned into the press with four cwt. additional pressure placed
     upon it. On the following morning it receives its third and last
     cloth, and when placed in the press, is now subjected to the
     pressure of 18 cwt. In the evening, it is once more removed from
     the press, gets a calico cap neatly stitched upon it, is reversed
     in the vat, placed under a pressure of one ton till the following
     morning, and is then finally taken from the press. The cheese is
     then tightly bandaged to preserve its proper shape, and being
     ticketed with its date and number, is carried to the cheese-room,
     where it must be turned every day until fully ripe for market.
     Cheeses may always be in the store-room in seventy-two hours after
     they are first put into the press, and, indeed, they might be
     placed there much earlier; only to insure consolidation, it is
     preferable to maintain the pressure during the time specified.

     A diary or register should be kept, into which the date and number
     of each cheese should be formally entered, together with such
     remarks as may be needful and proper concerning the condition of
     the milk, and the peculiarities of the curd, &c. The cheese-maker,
     when testing the quality of any cheese after it is ripe, may learn
     from the register the precise conditions of its manufacture, and
     will thus be assisted in attaining that degree of excellence which
     was laid down in the beginning of this work as a proper standard or
     quality.[A] It will also be found highly useful to note down many
     similar facts, such as the various yields of milk at particular
     seasons, and from different kinds of pasture or house-feeding, as
     the practice will not only give wide views of the subject, and
     correct information regarding it, but will also tend greatly to
     foster accurate and business-like habits.

     It is necessary to state distinctly the mode of procedure best
     adapted for this contingency because the over-acidity of milk when
     not detected and duly attended to in the process, produces a
     corresponding blemish in the cheese.

     In very warm weather, when the temperature of the evening's milk
     stands in the morning as high as 70° or upwards, every part of the
     process described in the previous section must be hastened. The
     curd is broken more speedily than usual, and whey is taken off as
     soon as possible, and quickly warmed for scalding. When the
     operation of breaking is concluded, an interval of only five
     minutes is allowed before the whey is run off. Scalding is then
     proceeded with, but, under these circumstances, the curd and whey
     should only be raised to the temperature of 98°. When the proper
     degree of firmness has been attained by stirring, the rest of the
     whey is run off after another interval of five minutes, and when
     the curd is heaped up, ten minutes only are allowed to elapse
     before it is cut across and turned over. At the end of other ten
     minutes, it is laid upon the cooler, in five minutes more it is
     turned over, and at the end of other five it is put into the vat
     and under the press. Having been subjected to pressure for five
     minutes, the curd is taken out, ground in the mill, put back into
     the cooler, and salted. It is then stirred up to cool, until the
     temperature of the mass is reduced to 65°, when it is placed in the
     vat, and subjected to the ordinary routine of pressure. It may be
     stated, in illustration of the time occupied by these operations,
     that if the curd be ready for breaking at eight o'clock, it may be
     milled and salted by eleven. By expeditiously conducting every
     stage of the process, excellent cheeses may be produced, even at
     the above temperature; but when the ordinary time is allowed to
     elapse before the curd is "cooked" and salted, the cheeses will
     likely be sour. These rules and statements are based on the safe
     ground of personal experience, for in a very warm season we have
     made upwards of forty tons of cheese without one being sour.

     In these days of dispatch and outward display, when men seek so
     eagerly for the shortest and easiest ways of doing things, some
     will doubtless be found to carp at the minuteness and extent of the
     foregoing details, and at the repeated injunction to strive after a
     clear and intelligent conception of the principles on which this
     branch of industry is founded. And many more, whose past experience
     has been little else than a slothful compliance with false rules
     and prejudices, may, perhaps, censure the system as too abstruse
     and complicated. But all such objections are refuted by the simple
     fact that no common product, made from raw material universally the
     same, varies more in quality and value than cheese, from the one
     cause of difference in the skill with which it is made. To attain
     to excellence in cheese-making, it is absolutely necessary that the
     hand and the head should work together.


The Cheddar process, as carried on at Spring Creek factory, is an
adaptation of the foregoing to American apparatus and implements, with
other variations. The milk is set in the usual manner, and at the usual
temperature--say, 82° to 84°. It is cut in the usual manner, and
gradually heated up to 98°. Then the whole is allowed to stand, with
occasional stirring, until the whey is perceptibly acid. The day we were
there, we found the curd in the whey, and as much changed as is
generally considered by Americans sufficient for dipping and salting.
But as soon as a slight change is perceptible--indeed, as soon as any
one of the hands fancies it is changed--the whey is drawn off. If the
whey should still be sweet and the curd soft, there is no harm in
drawing off the whey. Then one end of the vat is raised, the curd is
poked away from the lower end, and the whey is allowed to drain out. If
the curd is quite soft, the further separation of the whey is
facilitated by cross-cuttings with a large butcher or groceryman's
cheese-knife. If it is well "cooked," this is not necessary.

At the expiration of half an hour or so--provided the whey is not
rapidly taking on acid, in which case, at the expiration of five, ten,
or fifteen minutes, according to condition--the curd is cut into pieces
six or eight inches square, with the knife just mentioned; these pieces
are split laterally through the middle with the knife; the top and
bottom surfaces are put together, and the whole piled up along the sides
of the vat. The object of this operation is to get the cool surfaces
into the middle, to be influenced by the heat, and to give the already
heated center contact with the atmosphere. In a little while, the bottom
pieces are piled on top. The cutting and splitting operation may be
repeated at intervals of twenty or thirty minutes until the whey that
runs from the curd has much the taste of sour milk just before it begins
to lopper.

The whey looks white and rich, and is really so; but it is claimed, that
there is not as much waste as is caused by keeping the curd in the whey
and stirring it, when the butter and cheese that escape are so diluted
as not to be noticed.

When the whey draining from the curd has a decided sour-milk taste, the
accumulation is removed, the curd mill is set on the end of the vat, and
the large square pieces of curd thrown into the hopper and run through.
The mill tears them into pieces varying in size from that of a kernel of
corn to a butternut. When ground, two pounds and an eighth of salt are
sprinkled over the curd and stirred in. (Considering the dry state of
curd, this is really heavy salting--heavier than three pounds thrown on
the dripping curd, in the usual manner.) The salting done, the curd is
allowed to stand, with occasional stirring, as long as
convenient--indeed, the longer the better. It will take no harm after
being salted; and if a curd is at all tainted, or is made of sour-milk,
and is rather soft, it should be allowed to stand as long as possible,
and permit the hands to get it to press and ready to bandage the same
afternoon or evening.

This is the simple process, as we saw it at Spring Creek factory. The
pressing and curing are not essentially different from the common
methods. Thorough pressing, however, is considered essential; and so is
an equable temperature in the drying room--which, by the way, Mr.
MACADAM did not have the advantage of, as the building was erected on
economical principles, with a very primitive but thorough system of
ventilation--not under his direction or supervision, however.

With sour-milk, Mr. MACADAM hastens every stage of the process, up to
the time of salting. When the requisite degree of acid is developed,
even though the heat may not have gone above 90°, and the curd is very
soft, the whey is drawn off, and the curd repeatedly cut into small
squares with a knife, to facilitate the separation of the whey. The curd
is ground, and the salt thrown on--in less quantity--when the whey that
drains off has the proper sour milk taste. It is then allowed to stand
in the vat, and drain and harden, as long as the work of the factory
will permit. If it can remain a couple of days in the press, it is an
advantage.

The curds prepared in the manner we have been describing for good milk,
does not have a very promising look to an American cheese-maker. It is
tough and stringy, and quite elastic. At least, such was the appearance
of the curd which we saw. It is proper to state, however, that it was
made of tainted milk, and the taint was quite marked in the curd. This,
Mr. MACADAM told us, was the condition of most of the milk and curds for
some weeks past in that factory; yet, the taint did not show in the
cheese on the ranges, except in a few instances where the curd had been
salted a little too sweet, as he thought.

The great secret of his success, he seemed to think, was in getting rid
of the whey early, in allowing a good deal of acid to develop,
especially in tainted curds, in airing the curds and allowing the gases
to escape, and in salting well.

Mr. MACADAM'S cheese, as a general thing, tried splendidly. It was firm,
flaky, buttery and fine-flavored. His opinion is, that American cheese
is, as a general rule, salted too sweet and too low, for the purpose of
having it cure quick for market; but it lacks good keeping qualities,
and verifies the old adage, "Soon ripe, soon rotten." It is hard to
overcome this desire for quick returns; but he would recommend those who
wish to improve American cheese, to sour rather more, salt a little
more, and color a little less--as little as the market will allow--as
coloring is believed to be positively injurious to quality. The
_tendency_ should be in these directions, in order to make a slower
curing, better keeping and better flavored article.

But, it must be borne in mind, that Mr. MACADAM has in view his own
process of manufacture, and that allowances must be made for different
modes. Let each be ready to receive hints, make his own experiments, and
abide by his own decisions.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] "A good cheese is rich, without being greasy, with a sweet, nutty
flavor; clear, equal color throughout; of a compact, solid texture,
without being waxy; firm, yet melting easily in the mouth, and leaving
no rough flavor on the palate."




ADVERTISEMENTS


Utica Morning Herald

BOOK AND JOB PRINTING

ESTABLISHMENT,

No. 60 Genesee St., Utica, N. Y.,

Possesses EXTENSIVE MODERN FACILITIES for all kinds of

LETTER PRESS PRINTING,

And increased attention will be paid to this department, under the
direction of

R. W. ROBERTS.

NEW STYLES OF TYPE, BORDERS, &C.,

are provided as they appear in the Eastern cities, and the

Long Established Reputation

of the office will be maintained, for

THE BEST WORK AT THE LOWEST PRICES.

MANUFACTURERS,
LAWYERS,
AND BUSINESS MEN,

Will have their orders carefully and intelligently filled.

ELLIS H. ROBERTS, Proprietor.


Utica Morning Herald

AND DAILY GAZETTE,

NINE DOLLARS A YEAR IN ADVANCE, contains more reading matter than any
other daily published in Central New York, including the Fullest and
Latest

TELEGRAPHIC REPORTS,

CORRESPONDENCE

From the State and National Capitals,

and elsewhere, while especial attention is bestowed on

LOCAL AND GENERAL NEWS,

and a high Literary Standard is aimed at. An

AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT

is well maintained especially designed for the

Dairymen and Farmers

of the Central and Northern Counties.

The UTICA HERALD has by far the largest circulation in the City, and its

AGGREGATE CIRCULATION IS OVER 12,000.

ADVERTISE IN IT.


THE DAIRYMEN'S PAPER!

THE UTICA WEEKLY HERALD

has, since the first organization of the Dairymen's Association,
reported promptly and fully all of its proceedings and never more fully
and satisfactorily than the addresses and debates before the Convention
held in Utica in January, 1870.

The UTICA HERALD also devotes especial attention to everything connected
with the dairy interest; to

Diseases of Cattle and their Cure; The Manufacture of Butter and Cheese,
and to all Improved Processes and Apparatus.

The weekly edition every Tuesday contains the report of the

LITTLE FALLS MARKET OF THE PREVIOUS DAY.

The UTICA HERALD has made the dairy interest a specialty, and in its
weekly edition devotes to it

More Space and Attention than any other Paper in the Country.

At the same time, the UTICA WEEKLY HERALD aims to be in all respects a

FIRST-CLASS FAMILY PAPER.

Its Editorial Articles

are accepted and recognized as fitly speaking the Union sentiment, the
intelligent convictions, and the thoughtful aspirations of the million
of people which it represents.

The UTICA HERALD, in its weekly as well as its morning edition, is
pre-eminently

A NEWSPAPER.

By thorough classification and elaborate condensation it presents the
gist of all the news in the briefest space, and the person who reads no
other journal, will not be ignorant of the current of events, and the
movement of men and principles.

THE CORRESPONDENCE

weekly published in our columns, from Washington, New York, Albany and
elsewhere, is not inferior in literary or political interest to that of
any other journal in the country.

THE LITERARY DEPARTMENT

will receive during the coming year, increased attention, and we trust
will deserve in even a higher degree than heretofore the encomiums which
have been bestowed upon it.

ADVERTISE IN IT.

Manufacturers and merchants wishing to reach dairymen and producers of
butter and cheese, can do so in no other way so readily and so cheaply,
as through the columns of the UTICA WEEKLY HERALD.

THE TERMS.

The UTICA WEEKLY HERALD is published at the low price of

TWO DOLLARS A YEAR.

Payment is required in advance. Taking into account the size and
character of the paper--its political, news, literary and agricultural
merits--it is believed that this is

THE CHEAPEST PAPER PUBLISHED.

Now is the time to form clubs. Let the circulation be doubled during the
current year.

_Address, UTICA HERALD_,
60 Genesee Street, Utica, N. Y.


BOOK BINDING!

THE OLD ESTABLISHED

BOOK BINDERY,

No. 60 GENESEE ST., UTICA, N. Y.,

(_Morning Herald Block_,)

Has all the facilities for BINDING BOOKS, new and old, in as good style,
and at as low prices as can be obtained anywhere in New York or
elsewhere.

Many families may gather a respectable library by gathering up their

Magazines, Newspapers, and other Serials,

And we are prepared to bind in any desirable style

ATLANTIC MAGAZINE,
HARPER'S MAGAZINE,
KNICKERBOCKER MAGAZINE,
GRAHAM'S MAGAZINE,
PETERSON'S MAGAZINE,
HOME MAGAZINE,
LESLIE'S MAGAZINE,
BALLOU'S MAGAZINE,
LADY'S BOOK,
MUSIC,
LIBRARY BOOKS,
LAW BOOKS,
LESLIE'S PICTORIAL,
HARPER'S PICTORIAL,
BALLOU'S PICTORIAL,
ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS,
SPENCER'S HISTORY OF UNITED STATES,
TALLIS'S SHAKESPEARE,
JOHNSON'S SHAKESPEARE,
BOYDELL'S SHAKESPEARE,
IRVING'S WASHINGTON,
LOSSING'S WASHINGTON,
SCRIPTURE HISTORY,
LIFE OF CHRIST,
HARPER'S BIBLE,
BROWN'S BIBLE,
FLETCHER'S BIBLE,
VIRTUE'S BIBLE,
DOUAY BIBLE,
ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ARTS AND SCIENCES,
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN,
HINTON'S HISTORY OF UNITED STATES,

And all newspapers, whether great or small, as well as collections of
Pamphlets, Manuscripts, or whatever else is worthy of preservation.

Books will be bound in any style to suit the taste of our customers in

Full Turkey Gilt,
Full Calf, Antique Finished,
Half Calf, or Half Turkey,

or in Full Sheep, Full or Half Cloth, with Edges Gilt, Marbled, or
Sprinkled, as may be desired.

Books sent by express or otherwise, will receive prompt
attention. Good Workmanship and Reasonable Prices warranted.


The Largest Fancy Goods House

IN CENTRAL NEW YORK,

W. M. STORRS,

71 Genesee Street, Utica,

--DEALER IN--

FOREIGN & DOMESTIC

FANCY GOODS,

Shot Guns, Rifles, Revolvers, Cartridges,
Ammunition, Fishing Tackle and
Sporting Apparatus of every
Description.

Wooden & Willow Ware,

HOUSE-KEEPING GOODS,

Farm Baskets, Pails, Churns, &c., &c.

CALL AND SEE MY IMMENSE STOCK.

W. M. STORRS,
UTICA, N. Y.


READY-MADE CLOTHING!

Every farmer in this and adjoining counties will find it to his
advantage to purchase his Clothing of

C. A. YATES & CO.,

AT THE

MARBLE BLOCK

CLOTHING STORE.

We pay particular attention to the quality of the Cloth, have every
garment substantially made, and guarantee durability. We also keep the

LARGEST STOCK OF CLOTHING

in this section of the country, and can therefore give the advantage of
an immense variety. Our prices will at all times be the lowest in the
market, and goods will be freely shown, whether for the purpose of
buying at the time or at some future time. We therefore _invite all to
call and see our store and stock, and to learn our prices_.

Particular attention paid to

Youth's and Boys' Clothing.

The most extensive assortment in the county can be found at our store.

When in search of Clothing, _Look for the Marble Block_,

No. 54 Genesee St., Utica, N. Y.

C. A. YATES & CO.


AMERICAN BUTTON HOLE,

OVERSEAMING AND SEWING MACHINE.

The cheapest as well as the best, since it combines a Button Hole,
Overseaming and Sewing Machine, in one simple form, making either the
Lock Stitch or Button Hole Stitch, as occasion may require; doing every
variety of sewing in a SUPERIOR MANNER, and in addition works a most
perfect Button Hole and Overseams nicely.

Received a _First Premium_ at the New York State Fair, and numerous
other Fairs throughout the United States and Canada.

[Illustration: LAMB KNITTING MACHINE]

Knits Hosiery of all sizes. _Sets up its own work._ Knits the Heel and
narrows off the Toe, and knits a pair of socks in thirty minutes.

The _only_ Knitting Machine in the world that can shape a stocking the
same as can be done when knit by hand.

Will make four distinct webs, thus enabling the operator to do a great
variety of FANCY WORK.

For samples of work, and circulars of both Sewing Machine and Knitting
Machine, address,

H. J. HILLIARD,

(BUTTERFIELD HOUSE.)      205 Genesee St., Utica.


HOWES & CLARK,

Real Estate Brokers,

178 GENESEE STREET,

Z. M. HOWES,}      UTICA, N. Y.
B. A. CLARK.}

Agents for Sale, Purchase, Leasing, Care, and Management of Real Estate.

Mortgages Negotiated and Investments Made.

FIRE, LIFE AND ACCIDENTAL INSURANCE IN FIRST CLASS COMPANIES.

_Deeds, Mortgages and Leases Drawn and Executed._


The Best Dairy Paper!

At a recent meeting of the Farmers' Club, of the American Institute, in
New York City, a correspondent asked for

"The Best Paper

IN THIS COUNTRY

DEVOTED TO THE DAIRY INTEREST?"

Mr. F. D. CURTIS, Vice President of the STATE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY,
answered, and it went on record as the

SENTIMENT OF THE CLUB:

"THE UTICA HERALD."

THE UTICA WEEKLY HERALD

IS ONLY

TWO DOLLARS A YEAR, IN ADVANCE.


[Illustration: WOOD & MANN

STEAM ENGINE CO.,]

PORTABLE STEAM ENGINES,

From 4 to 20 Horse Power.

STATIONARY ENGINES,

From 4 to 500 Horse Power.

BOILERS OF ALL KINDS,

CIRCULAR SAW MILLS, &C.

Boilers Especially Adapted to Cheese Factories

On Hand or Furnished on Short Notice.

Having one of the Oldest, Largest and Most Complete Works in the United
States, especially adapted to the manufacture of Engines, Boilers, Saw
Mills, &c., we are able to furnish them, built of the very best
materials, and at the lowest prices at which work in any way equal, can
be obtained.

Prices furnished on application.

Wood & Mann Steam Engine Co.,
UTICA, N. Y.


WILLIAM RALPH & CO.,

173 & 175 Genesee St.,

WM. RALPH,  }      UTICA, N. Y.
JOHN CARTON.}

MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN

CHEESE-FACTORY AND FARM

Dairy Apparatus,

TOOLS, IMPLEMENTS

AND

FURNISHING GOODS,

SUCH AS

CHEESE VATS FOR FACTORIES,
CHEESE VATS FOR DAIRIES,
FACTORY WARMING AND
VENTILATING APPARATUS, WATER-HEATERS,
WEIGHING CANS, CARRYING CANS,
CHEESE PRESSES, PRESS SCREWS,

WOOD PRESS HOOPS, METALLIC PRESS HOOPS,
MILK AGITATORS, "AMERICAN" CURD MILL,
CURD AGITATORS, LACTOMETERS,
MILK TEST GLASSES, CREAM GAUGES,
THERMOMETERS, STEEL CURD KNIVES,

DRAINING SINKS, MILK CONDUCTORS,
PLATFORM SCALES, IMPROVED TIN MILK PAILS,
DAIRY PAILS, DAIRY DIPPERS,
CURD SCOOPS, WHEY STRAINERS,
RENNET JARS,
PATENT MILK CAN HANDLES,

STENCIL PLATES, FACTORY MILK BOOKS,
ANNOTTA, SCALE BOARDS,
CHEESE BANDAGE, RENNETS,
MILK, WATER AND WHEY FAUCETS,
SINK CASTORS, CHEESE HOOPS,
HANDLES, &c., &c.

All articles in our line are of the best kinds and most
approved patterns, and our prices as low as first class goods can be
furnished.

Plans, Estimates, &c., for Cheese-Factories and Dairies,
together with other information pertaining thereto, will be cheerfully
furnished to parties interested, on application.


RALPH'S ONEIDA CHEESE VATS

For Cheese Factories & Farm Dairies.

ADAPTED TO ALL CLASSES, HOWEVER LARGE OR SMALL.

(_See cut of 600 gallon, factory size, on cover._)

This Cheese Vat is constantly growing in favor as its merits become
known; it is now used in about 500 Cheese Factories and 1400 Dairies.
From its construction and principle of operation--differing essentially
from all others,--a larger amount of cheese from a given amount of milk
can be made with it, with a much less consumption of fuel and labor. By
it _the heat is perfectly controllable, and distributed absolutely equal
in every part_, except that there is a slightly less amount at the
bottom of the Milk Vat; this is effected by the "EQUALIZER"--which is
not used in any other apparatus,--and is an advantage duly appreciated
by all good cheese-makers.

These Vats are complete and ready for use on attaching smoke pipe,
involving the use of _no steam-boiler or pipes, brick arches or other
expensive appertenance_; are quite simple in arrangement, strong and
durable in construction.

_Send for Descriptive Circular and Price List._

WM. RALPH & CO.,

UTICA, N. Y.


CHEESE FACTORY

WARMING & VENTILATING APPARATUS.

WE WOULD INVITE ATTENTION TO THIS ARTICLE:

It is admirably adapted to securing a proper condition of the atmosphere
in the curing-room to facilitate the curing of the cheese, particularly
in cool and damp weather, in spring and fall, giving

A Soft Genial Temperature Throughout the Building,

favorable to a rapid and proper ripening of the cheese; there being no
more heat near the heater than in remote parts of the room. By a
suitable inlet and ventiducts, air from the outside may be conducted to
the heater and from thence distributed to all parts of the curing-room,
expelling the old and perhaps tainted air from the building. For further
information address,

WM. RALPH & CO.,

UTICA, N. Y.


JONES & FAULKNER'S

Dairy Furnishing Store,

No. 141 GENESEE STREET,

UTICA, N. Y.

We beg leave to call your attention to our stock of Dairy Furnishing
Goods, being the only complete assortment in this line to be found in
the United States. Believing we can make it an object for you to
purchase of us, we earnestly solicit your patronage.

We shall issue our Price List about the 1st of March. Those sending
their names to us, will receive a copy of the same by mail.


CHEESE VATS.

WE SELL

Ralph's and O'Neil's Patent Vats, Bagg's, Miller's, and Schermerhorn's
Patent Heaters, at Manufacturers' prices.

HOOPS.

ALL SIZES.

Improved Hard Wood, Extra Hooped with Iron, Welded and Riveted Bands,
and Malleable Handles, also Galvanized Hoops.

SCREWS.

ALL STYLES AND SIZES.

Wrought Iron, and of superior manufacture.

BANDAGE.

ALL WIDTHS.

26, 28, 34, 36, 38 and 40 inch, Bleached and Unbleached.

Linen Strainer and Linen and Cotton Press and Cap Cloth, also Bleached
and Brown Sheetings.

STONE RENNET JARS.

Sizes 8, 10, 12, 15 and 20 gallons.

WEIGH and CARRYING CANS.

ALL SIZES.

With Patent Bottoms, and extra heavy Tin.

Burnap's Concave Can Bottoms and Convex Tops, best thing made.

DAIRY KNIVES.

Young's celebrated Two Edged, Cast Steel, best in use, all sizes, with
Perpendicular and Horizontal Blades.

ANNOTTO.

Common, Medium, and Extra Fine, also Liquid Annato.

RENNETS.

_American and Imported, of superior quality and strength._

MISCELLANEOUS.

Factory Account Books, all Sizes.
        Curd Scoops, wood and tin.
              Rubber and Tin Syphons and Strainers.
                      Rubber Mops and Aprons.
                              Improved Per Cent. Lactometers.
                                    Alkali and Spirit Meters.
Legal Instruments for detecting impurities in Milk.
        Glass Test Tubes. Cheese and Butter Tryers.
              Indelible Marking Paste, red, blue and black.
                      Stencil Plates and Brushes.
                              Factory Brands. Factory Slates.
                                    Factory Soldering Irons.
Weigh Can Gates, 3 in.                      Dairy Dippers.
        Milk and Hot Water Faucets, all sizes.  Conductor Heads.
              Scale Boards, all sizes.
                      Wood, Iron and Lead Water Pipes
                              and Steam Pipes.
Curd Sink Castors.                  McAdams' English Curd Mills.
        Platform Scales.  Potash and Concentrated Lye.
                              New Style Brass Thermometers.

Finally, every article used by Cheese Factory and Dairymen, pertaining
to the manufacture of Cheese.

We also sell the Annual Reports of the American Dairymen's Association,
and McAdams' explanation of the Cheddar System.

Factorymen wishing Cheese-Makers, will do well to apply to us, as we
have a list of First Class Makers desiring situations.

Cheese-Makers who are competent, and can give satisfactory references,
may do well to make application to us.

Goods ordered from us will be carefully packed and shipped as
directed to any part of the World.

JONES & FAULKNER,

No. 141 GENESEE STREET,

UTICA, N. Y.


GREAT REDUCTION IN THE PRICE OF CLOTHING!

Some of the BARGAINS to be found at the
GREAT WARDROBE.
CALL AND INSPECT THEM.

BLACK BROADCLOTH FROCKCOATS,                      Only Seven Dollars.
HEAVY BLACK DOESKIN PANTS,                         Only Four Dollars.
FINE BLACK DOESKIN VESTS,           Only Two Dollars and Fifty Cents.
HEAVY STOUT PANTS, (BLACK OR MIXED,)              Only Three Dollars.
HEAVY MOSCOW BEAVER OVERCOATS,                  Only Fifteen Dollars.
HEAVY AND WARM OVERCOATS,           Only Six Dollars and Fifty Cents.
GOOD ALL WOOL OVERCOATS,                          Only Seven Dollars.
HEAVY ALL WOOL SACKCOATS,                           Only Six Dollars.

A LARGE STOCK OF BOYS' CLOTHING,

A Good Share at Cost, and part Less than Cost.

A Splendid Assortment of
FURNISHING GOODS,
Cheaper than at any other Store.

The New and Elegant "IRVING" PAPER COLLAR,    Only Ten Cents per Box.
FINE LINEN COLLARS,         Only One Dollar and Fifty Cents per Dozen.
GOOD WHITE SHIRTS,                              Only One Dollar Each.
QUAKER CITY FINE SHIRTS, the Best Shirts in the United States.
  Those Made from New York Mills Muslin,     Only Three Dollars Each.
  From Wamsutta Muslin,      Only Two Dollars and Seventy-five Cents.
  Lower Grades of the same make, at Two Dollars and Fifty Cents and
                                                    Two Dollars Each.

Don't Fail to Examine these Shirts--It may be an Advantage to You.

FINE WHITE WRAPPERS AND DRAWERS,                Only One Dollar Each.
HEAVY MIXED WRAPPERS AND DRAWERS,              Only Fifty Cents Each.

CALL AT THE
GREAT WARDROBE
THE MODEL CLOTHING STORE,
110 & 112 Genesee St., Utica, N. Y.

CHARLES C. KINGSLEY.

Agents for the Double Warp Royal Standard Alpacas.
We Make a Specialty of Flannels and Blankets.

[Illustration]

AGENTS FOR MATIER & CO., OF BELFAST, LINEN MANUFACTURERS.
Agents for Williston's Combed Sea Island Machine Thread.

V. B. STEWART & CO.,
Manufacturers of and Dealers in
CLOAKS,
DRY & FANCY GOODS,
Silks, Shawls, Dress Goods, Cloakings,
CARPETS, OIL CLOTHS, MATS, &c.,
Nos. 166 & 168 Genesee Street, Utica, N. Y.


CHAMBERLAIN & CUSHMAN,
--GENERAL AGENTS FOR THE--
Singer's Sewing Machines
--AND--
BICKFORD FAMILY KNITTING MACHINE,

FOR THE COUNTIES OF

Chenango, Herkimer, Jefferson, Lewis, Oneida, Otsego
and St. Lawrence.

113 GENESEE ST., UTICA, N. Y.

The Celebrated Singer Family Sewing Machine, one of the oldest and most
reliable Sewing Machines in use. It has been very much improved in the
past year, making it the most quiet and easiest running shuttle machine
now in use. It is adapted to a greater range of work than any other one
machine, sewing from the finest tuck in Tarliton to a heavy Beaver coat.
Its Attachments for Hemming, Braiding, Cording, Tucking, Quilting,
Felling, Trimming, Binding, Ruffling and Embroidering, are novel and
practical, and have been invented and adjusted especially for this
Machine. There is now nearly 400,000 in use. There is now being made and
sold over 4,000 machines each week, which is one of its best
recommendations over other machines. It is perfectly simple and easy to
learn. Don't fail to see one before purchasing a machine.

THE BICKFORD KNITTING MACHINE

Will Knit 15,000 stitches or 18 inches of Perfect Work in a Minute.

Socks complete and whole with double heel and toe. Strips from 1 to 12
inches wide, with selvedge on each edge. Fringe of any length, Cord of
any size, and Tufting of any style.

PRICE 30 DOLLARS.


TAYLOR & CO.'S
Jewelry Establishment,
70 GENESEE ST., UTICA, N. Y.

AMERICAN WATCHES,
COMPRISING THE

[Illustration]

HOWARD WATCH,
WALTHAM WATCH,

ELGIN WATCH,
UNITED STATES WATCH,

ALL AT FACTORY PRICES,
In Gold and Silver Cases.

In SOLID SILVER WARE, of Gorham Manufacture, and in FINE SILVER PLATED
WARE, of Rogers & Bros. make, we have a great variety of the very best
patterns.

In ELEGANT JEWELRY we have the newest and most desirable patterns,
consisting of

Gold Chains, Sets--Pins and Ear-Rings, Finger-Rings,
Lockets, Bracelets, Sleeve-Buttons,
Studs, &c., &c.

Purchasers of any articles in our line are invited to give us a call.
All goods warranted.

W. S. TAYLOR & CO., 70 Genesee St.


THE GENUINE

OR,

Elias Howe Sewing Machine.

[Illustration: THIS MEDALLION IS EMBEDDED IN EVERY GENUINE HOWE SEWING
MACHINE]

Hemmer,
  Feller,
    Binder,
Braider,
  Quilter,
    Self-Baster,
Corder,
    (adjustable foot,)
  Embroidery
    Attachment,
      and Gage.

SOLD ONLY AT
87 GENESEE ST., UTICA.

OVERTON & BUCKINGHAM, Agents.

N. B.--None genuine without the Trade Mark, (Medallion Profile of ELIAS
HOWE, Jr.,) is imbedded in the Machine. This is the GENUINE HOWE. Prof.
"ELIAS HOWE, Jr., the inventor, has

+The Exclusive Right to Make and Sell this Machine+."

Decision, Judge INGRAHAM--May, 1867.

_Awarded the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor, the Grand Gold Medal
and a Silver Medal, Paris Exposition, 1867; the Grand Gold Medal,
London, 1862; Six First Premiums, N. Y. State Fair, 1867, on Machine and
Samples of Work._

Also, the following STATE FAIRS of 1868, have awarded this Machine the

FIRST PREMIUM:

New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts.
Vermont, New Hampshire, Wisconsin, Indiana.

At the County Fairs of Madison, Onondaga, Oswego, Wayne, Orleans,
Tompkins, Seneca, Monroe, Herkimer, Schuyler, Livingston and a host of
others, and Town Fairs too numerous to mention.

_Agents for the NEW WILLISTON THREAD, made of Combed Sea Island Cotton._


PECKHAM'S POPULAR COOKING STOVE.

[Illustration: P.P.C.]

A New Strictly First Class Cooking Stove,

_FOR COAL AND WOOD_.

Unequalled and Warranted

IN EVERY RESPECT.

The Success and Superiority of this new Stove is Established beyond a
doubt.

For its Economy of Fuel, Spacious Ovens, Splendid Baking Qualities,
Facilities for Keeping Fire for great length of time, Extra Weight and
Quality of Castings, and Superior Fitting of the Joints.

New Patent Movable Reservoir, New Patent Sectional Fire-Plate, New
Patent Sad Iron Heater, New Patent Roaster. _All Valuable Improvements._
Call and Examine the Stoves and get Circulars with Testimonials.

MANUFACTURED AND SOLD BY
J. S. & M. PECKHAM,
20 Catharine St., Utica, N. Y.


PECKHAM'S

NEW PATTERN

Agricultural Furnace & Boiler,

[Illustration]

Warranted to Boil with Less Fuel and in Less Time than any Boiler Made.

This Furnace is used to great advantage by _Cheese-Makers, Farmers,
Butchers, Bakers and Hotel Keepers_, and for various other Manufacturing
and Mechanical purposes.

The Flues of this Boiler are so constructed that the whole surface of
the Caldron is heated at the same time. They are portable, and require
only a few lengths of pipe to fit them for use, and possess great
advantages over Caldron Kettles set in brick.

J. S. & M. PECKHAM,
Sole Manufacturers, Utica, N. Y.


THE PREMIUM HARVESTER

OF AMERICA.

[Illustration: ON THE ROAD.]

THE ORIGINAL AND ONLY PREMIUM

BUCKEYE MOWER

AND COMBINED

SELF-RAKING REAPER.

Awarded the _Highest_ Premium both in _Mowing and Self-Raking_, at the
most important field trials ever held in _any_ country.

Over 125,000 now in use.

30,000 sold in a single season.

MANUFACTURED BY

ADRIANCE, PLATT & CO.,

FOR

J. M. CHILDS & CO., UTICA, N. Y.

Office, 121 Genesee Street.

Circulars forwarded by mail.


HINTS

ON

CHEESE-MAKING,

FOR THE

Dairyman, the Factoryman,

AND THE

MANUFACTURER.

BY T. D. CURTIS.

UTICA, N. Y.

ROBERTS, PRINTER, MORNING HERALD ESTABLISHMENT.

1870.


THE BEST DAIRY PAPER!

At a recent meeting of the Farmers' Club, of the American Institute, in
New York City, a correspondent asked for "THE BEST PAPER IN THIS COUNTRY

DEVOTED TO THE DAIRY INTEREST?"

Mr. F. D. CURTIS, Vice-President of the _State Agricultural Society_,
answered, and it went on record as the SENTIMENT OF THE CLUB:

"THE UTICA HERALD."

THE UTICA WEEKLY HERALD

Is Only Two Dollars a Year, in advance.


THE DAIRYMEN'S PAPER!

THE UTICA WEEKLY HERALD

has, since the first organization of the Dairymen's Association,
reported promptly and fully all of its proceedings and never more fully
and satisfactorily than the addresses and debates before the Convention
held in Utica in January, 1870.

The UTICA HERALD also devotes especial attention to everything connected
with the dairy interest; to

Diseases of Cattle and their Cure; The Manufacture of Butter and Cheese,
and to all Improved Processes and Apparatus.

The weekly edition every Tuesday contains the report of the

LITTLE FALLS MARKET OF THE PREVIOUS DAY.

The UTICA HERALD has made the dairy interest a specialty, and in its
weekly edition devotes to it

More Space and Attention than any other Paper in the Country.

At the same time, the UTICA WEEKLY HERALD aims to be in all respects a

FIRST-CLASS FAMILY PAPER.

Its Editorial Articles

are accepted and recognized as fitly speaking the Union sentiment, the
intelligent convictions, and the thoughtful aspirations of the million
of people which it represents.

The UTICA HERALD, in its weekly as well as its morning edition, is
pre-eminently

A NEWSPAPER.

By thorough classification and elaborate condensation it presents the
gist of all the news in the briefest space, and the person who reads no
other journal, will not be ignorant of the current of events, and the
movement of men and principles.

THE CORRESPONDENCE

weekly published in our columns, from Washington, New York, Albany and
elsewhere, is not inferior in literary or political interest to that of
any other journal in the country.

THE LITERARY DEPARTMENT

will receive during the coming year, increased attention, and we trust
will deserve in even a higher degree than heretofore the encomiums which
have been bestowed upon it.

ADVERTISE IN IT.

Manufacturers and merchants wishing to reach dairymen and producers of
butter and cheese, can do so in no other way so readily and so cheaply,
as through the columns of the UTICA WEEKLY HERALD.

THE TERMS.

The UTICA WEEKLY HERALD is published at the low price of

TWO DOLLARS A YEAR.

Payment is required in advance. Taking into account the size and
character of the paper--its political, news, literary and agricultural
merits--it is believed that this is

THE CHEAPEST PAPER PUBLISHED.

Now is the time to form clubs. Let the circulation be doubled during the
current year.

_Address_, _UTICA HERALD_,
60 Genesee Street, Utica, N. Y.


WILLIAM RALPH & CO.,

MANUFACTURERS OF

ONEIDA CHEESE VATS,

FOR CHEESE-FACTORIES AND DAIRIES.

(See Advertisements Inside.)

[Illustration]

Address, WILLIAM RALPH & CO., 173 and 175 Genesee St., Utica, N. Y.





End of Project Gutenberg's Hints on cheese-making, by Thomas Day Curtis



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HINTS ON CHEESE-MAKING, FOR THE DAIRYMAN, THE FACTORYMAN, AND THE MANUFACTURER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Book of Cheese
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Book of Cheese

Author: Charles Thom
        W. W. Fisk

Release date: July 25, 2012 [eBook #40318]

Language: English

Credits: E-text prepared by Susan Carr, Turgut Dincer, Charlene Taylor, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by Internet Archive (http://archive.org)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF CHEESE ***


E-text prepared by Susan Carr, Turgut Dincer, Charlene Taylor, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page
images generously made available by Internet Archive (http://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 40318-h.htm or 40318-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/40318/pg40318-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/40318/40318-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://archive.org/details/bookofcheese00thomrich


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by plus signs is in bold face (+bold+).





THE BOOK OF CHEESE

       *       *       *       *       *

  The Rural Text-Book Series

  EDITED BY L. H. BAILEY


  _Carleton_: THE SMALL GRAINS.

  _B. M. Duggar_: THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PLANT PRODUCTION.

  _J. F. Duggar_: SOUTHERN FIELD CROPS.

  _Gay_: BREEDS OF LIVE-STOCK.

  _Gay_: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF JUDGING LIVE-STOCK.

  _Goff_: PRINCIPLES OF PLANT CULTURE.

  _Guthrie_: BOOK OF BUTTER.

  _Harper_: ANIMAL HUSBANDRY FOR SCHOOLS.

  _Harris and Stewart_: PRINCIPLES OF AGRONOMY.

  _Hitchcock_: TEXT-BOOK OF GRASSES.

  _Jeffery_: TEXT-BOOK OF LAND DRAINAGE.

  _Jordan_: FEEDING OF ANIMALS. Revised.

  _Livingston_: FIELD CROP PRODUCTION.

  _Lyon_: SOILS AND FERTILIZERS.

  _Lyon, Fippin and Buckman_: SOILS, THEIR PROPERTIES AND MANAGEMENT.

  _Mann_: BEGINNINGS IN AGRICULTURE.

  _Montgomery_: THE CORN CROPS.

  _Morgan_: FIELD CROPS FOR THE COTTON-BELT.

  _Mumford_. THE BREEDING OF ANIMALS.

  _Piper_: FORAGE PLANTS AND THEIR CULTURE.

  _Sampson_: EFFECTIVE FARMING.

  _Thom_ and _Fisk_: THE BOOK OF CHEESE.

  _Warren_: THE ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURE.

  _Warren_: FARM MANAGEMENT.

  _Wheeler_: MANURES AND FERTILIZERS.

  _White_: PRINCIPLES OF FLORICULTURE.

  _Widtsoe_: PRINCIPLES OF IRRIGATION PRACTICE.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: FIG. 1.--A cheese laboratory in the New York State
College of Agriculture at Cornell University.]


THE BOOK OF CHEESE

by

CHARLES THOM

Investigator in Cheese, Formerly at Connecticut
Agricultural College

and

WALTER W. FISK

Assistant Professor of Dairy Industry (Cheese-Making),
New York State College of Agriculture
at Cornell University







New York
The Macmillan Company
1918
All rights reserved


Copyright, 1918,
By the Macmillan Company.

Set up and electrotyped. Published July, 1918.

Norwood Press
J. S. Cushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




PREFACE


Certain products we associate with the manufactures of the household, so
familiar and of such long standing that we do not think of them as
requiring investigation or any special support of science. The older
ones of us look back on cheese as an ancient home product; yet the
old-fashioned hard strong kind has given place to many named varieties,
some of them bearing little resemblance to the product of the kitchen
and the buttery. We have analyzed the processes; discovered
microorganisms that hinder or help; perfected devices and machines;
devised tests of many kinds; studied the chemistry; developed markets
for standardized commodities. Here is one of the old established farm
industries that within a generation has passed from the housewife and
the home-made hand press to highly perfected factory processes employing
skilled service and handling milk by the many tons from whole
communities of cows. This is an example of the great changes in
agricultural practice. Cheese-making is now a piece of applied science;
many students in the colleges are studying the subject; no one would
think of undertaking it in the old way: for these reasons this book is
written.

This book is intended as a guide in the interpretation of the processes
of making and handling a series of important varieties of cheese. The
kinds here considered are those made commercially in America, or so
widely met in the trade that some knowledge of them is necessary. The
relation of cheese to milk and to its production and composition has
been presented in so far as required for this purpose. The principles
and practices underlying all cheese-making have been brought together
into a chapter on curd-making. A chapter on classification then brings
together into synoptical form our knowledge of groups of varieties.
These groups are then discussed separately. The problems of factory
building, factory organization, buying and testing milk, and the proper
marketing of cheese, are briefly discussed.

Such a discussion should be useful to the student, to the beginner in
cheese-making, as a reference book on many varieties in the hands of
makers who specialize in single varieties, and to the housekeeper or
teacher of domestic science. The material has been brought together from
the experience of the writers, supplemented by free use of the
literature in several languages. Standard references to this literature
are added in the text.

No introduction to the subject of cheese should fail to mention the work
of J. H. Monrad, who has recently passed away. Mr. Monrad never
collected his material into a single publication, but his contributions
to cheese-making information, scattered widely in trade literature over
a period of thirty years, form an encyclopedia of the subject.

Bulletins of the Agricultural Experiment Stations and United States
Department of Agriculture have been quoted extensively, with citation of
the sources of the material. Personal assistance from Professor W. A.
Stocking and other members of the Dairy Department of Cornell
University, and C. F. Doane of the United States Department of
Agriculture, is gladly acknowledged.

Students cannot learn out of books to make cheese. They may, however,
be aided in understanding the problems from such study. To make cheese
successfully they must have intimate personal touch with some person who
knows cheese. Sympathetic relations with such a teacher day by day in
the cheese-room are essential to success in making cheese which, at its
best, is one of the most attractive of food-products.


  THE AUTHORS.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I

                                                                PAGES

  GENERAL STATEMENT ON CHEESE                                     1-4

  Nature of cheese, 1; Cheese-making as an art, 2;
  Cheese-making as a science, 3; Problems in cheese-making,
  4; History, 5.


  CHAPTER II

  THE MILK IN ITS RELATION TO CHEESE                             5-28

  Factors affecting the quality, 6; Chemical composition, 7;
  Factors causing variation in composition, 8; Milk
  constituents, 9; Water, 10; Fat, 11; Casein, 12;
  Milk-sugar, 13; Albumin, 14; Ash, 15; Enzymes, 16; The
  flavor of feeds eaten by the cow, 17; Absorption of odors,
  18; Effect of condition of the cow, 19; Bacteria in the
  milk, 20; Groups of bacteria in milk, 21; Acid
  fermentation of milk, 22; Bacterium lactis-acidi group,
  23; Colon-aërogenes group, 24; Acid peptonizing group, 25;
  Bacillus bulgaricus group, 26; Acid cocci or weak
  acid-producers, 27; Peptonizing organisms, 28; Inert
  types, 29; Alkali-producing bacteria, 30; Butyric
  fermenting types, 31; Molds and yeasts, 32; Bacterial
  contamination of milk, 33; Germicidal effect of milk, 34;
  Sources and control of bacteria in milk, 35; The cow, 36;
  Stable air, 37; The milker, 38; Utensils, 39; The factory,
  40; The control of bacteria, 41; Fermentation test, 42;
  The sediment test, 43.


  CHAPTER III

  COAGULATING MATERIALS                                         29-40

  Ferments, 44; Nature of rennet, 45; Preparation of rennet
  extract, 46; Pepsin, 47; Chemistry of curdling, 48; Use
  of acid, 49; Robertson's theory, 50; Rennet curd, 51;
  Hammarsten's theory, 52; Duclaux theory, 53; Bang's
  theory, 54; Bosworth's theory, 55.


  CHAPTER IV

  LACTIC STARTERS                                               41-54

  Acidifying organisms, 56; Starter, 57; Natural starter,
  58; Commercial starter or pure cultures, 59;
  Manufacturer's directions, 60; Selecting milk, 61;
  Pasteurization, 62; Containers, 63; Adding cultures, 64;
  Cleanliness, 65; "Mother" starter or startoline, 66;
  Examining starter, 67; Second day's propagation, 68;
  Preparations of larger amount of starter, 69; Amount of
  mother starter to use, 70; Qualities, 71; How to carry the
  mother starter, 72; Starter score-cards, 73; Use of
  starter, 74; The amount of starter to use, 75; Starter
  lot-card, 76.


  CHAPTER V

  CURD-MAKING                                                   55-80

  The composition of the milk, 77; Cheese color, 78; The
  acidity factor, 79; Acidity of milk when received, 80; The
  acid test, 81; Rennet tests, 82; Marschall rennet test,
  83; Comparison of acid and rennet test, 84; Control of
  acid, 85; Acidity and rennet action, 86; Acidity and
  expulsion of the whey, 87; Acidity in relation to cheese
  flavor, 88; Acidity in relation to body and texture of
  cheese, 89; Acidity in relation to cheese color, 90;
  Control of moisture, 91; Relation of moisture to
  manufacture and quality, 92; Relation of moisture to
  acidity, 93; Setting temperature, 94; Strength of
  coagulating materials, 95; Amount of coagulating materials
  to use, 96; Method of adding rennet, 97; The curdling
  period, 98; Cutting or breaking the curd, 99; Curd knives,
  100; Heating or "cooking," 101; Draining, 102; Application
  to cheese, 103.


  CHAPTER VI

  CLASSIFICATION                                                81-88

  Basis of classification, 104; Processed cheeses, 105; Whey
  cheeses, 106; Soft and hard cheeses, 107; Relation of
  moisture to classes, 108; Relation of heat to classes,
  109.


  CHAPTER VII

  CHEESES WITH SOUR-MILK FLAVOR                                89-110

  Skim series, 110; Cottage cheese, 111; Household practice,
  112; Factory practice, 113; Buttermilk cheese, 114;
  Neufchâtel group, 115; Domestic or American Neufchâtel
  cheeses, 116; The factory, 117; Cans, 118; Draining racks,
  119; Cloths, 120; Molding machinery, 121; Milk for
  Neufchâtel, 122; Starter, 123; Renneting or setting, 124;
  Draining, 125; Cooling Neufchâtel, 126; Pressing, 127;
  Working and salting Neufchâtel, 128; Storage, 129;
  Molding, 130; Skimmed-milk Neufchâtel, 131; Baker's
  cheese, 132; Domestic Neufchâtel, 133; Partially skim
  Neufchâtel, 134; Cream cheese, 135; Neufchâtel
  specialties, 136; Gervais, 137; European forms
  occasionally imported, 138.


  CHAPTER VIII

  SOFT CHEESES RIPENED BY MOLD                                111-133

  Hand cheese and its allies, 139; Pennsylvania pot cheese,
  140; Appetitost (Appetite cheese), 141; Ripened
  Neufchâtel, French process, 142; The Camembert group, 143;
  Camembert cheese, 144; Description of Camembert, 145;
  Conditions of making and ripening, 146; Outline of making
  process, 147; Acidity, 148; Ripening the cheese, 149;
  Composition, 150; Factory, 151; Economic factors, 152;
  French Brie, 153; Coulommiers, 154.


  CHAPTER IX

  SOFT CHEESES RIPENED BY BACTERIA                            134-148

  The Isigny group, 155; Raffiné, 156; Liederkranz cheese,
  157; Limburger cheese, 158; The milk, 159; Making the
  cheese, 160; Draining and salting, 161; Ripening, 162;
  Marketing and qualities of Limburger, 163; Yield and
  composition of Limburger, 164; Münster cheese, 165.


  CHAPTER X

  SEMI-HARD CHEESES                                           149-171

  The green mold group, 166; Roquefort cheese, 167; Cow's
  milk or Façons Roquefort, 168; Outline of making
  Roquefort, 169; Ripening of Roquefort, 170; Gorgonzola,
  171; Stilton cheese, 172; Gex, 173; Bacterially-ripened
  series, 174; Brick cheese, 175; Making of brick cheese,
  176; Ripening brick cheese, 177; Qualities of brick
  cheese, 178; Composition and yield, 179; Port du Salut
  cheese, 180.


  CHAPTER XI

  THE HARD CHEESES                                            172-183

  The Danish group, 181; The Dutch group, 182; Edam cheese,
  183; Method of manufacture, 184; Salting and curing Edam,
  185; Equipment for making Edam cheese, 186; Qualities and
  yield of Edam cheese, 187; Gouda cheese, 188; Method of
  manufacture, 189; Equipment for Gouda cheese, 190;
  Composition and yield, 191.


  CHAPTER XII

  CHEDDAR CHEESE-MAKING                                       184-221

  The lot-card, 192; The milk, 193; Ripening the milk, 194;
  Setting or coagulating, 195; Cutting, 196; Heating or
  "cooking" the curd, 197; Removing the whey, 198; Hot-iron
  test, 199; Firmness of the curd, 200; Gathering the curd
  together, 201; Matting or cheddaring, 202; Milling the
  curd, 203; Salting, 204; Hooping the curd, 205; Pressing
  the curd, 206; Dressing the cheese, 207; Handling
  over-ripe and gassy milk, 208; Qualities of Cheddar
  cheese, 209.


  CHAPTER XIII

  COMPOSITION AND YIELD OF CHEDDAR CHEESE                     222-246

  Composition of milk, whey and cheese, 210; Relations of
  fat to casein in normal milk, 211; Influence of fat in
  milk on yield of cheese, 212; Fat loss in cheese-making,
  213; Effect of bacterial-content of milk on yield of
  cheese, 214; Factors affecting the moisture-content of
  Cheddar, 215; Variations of the Cheddar process, 216;
  Cheddar-type cheese from pasteurized milk, 217; Club
  cheese, 218; The stirred-curd or granular process, 219;
  California Jack cheese, 220; The washed-curd process, 221;
  English dairy cheese, 222; Pineapple cheese, 223; Leyden,
  224; Cheddar cheese with pimientos, 225; Sage cheese, 226;
  Skimmed-milk cheese, 227; Full skimmed-milk Cheddar
  cheese, 228; Half skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese, 229; Yield
  and qualities of skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese, 230.


  CHAPTER XIV

  CHEDDAR CHEESE RIPENING                                     247-275

  Fat, 231; Milk-sugar, 232; The salts, 233; Gases, 234;
  Casein or proteins, 235; Causes of ripening changes, 236;
  Action of the rennet extract, 237; The action of the
  bacteria, 238; Conditions affecting the rate of cheese
  ripening, 239; The length of time, 240; The temperature of
  the curing-room, 241; Moisture-content of the cheese, 242;
  The size of the cheese, 243; The amount of salt used, 244;
  The amount of rennet extract, 245; The influence of acid,
  246; Care of the cheese in the curing-room, 247;
  Evaporation of moisture from the cheese during ripening,
  248; Paraffining, 249; Shipping, 250. _Defects in Cheddar
  cheese_: Defects in flavor, 251; Feedy flavors, 252; Acid
  flavors, 253; Sweet or fruity flavors, 254; Defects in
  body and texture, 255; Loose or open texture, 256; Dry
  body, 257; Gassy textured cheese, 258; Acidy, pasty or
  soft body and texture, 259; Defects in color, 260; Defects
  in finish, 261. _Cheddar cheese judging_: Securing the
  sample, 262; How to determine quality, 263; Causes of
  variations in score, 264; The score-card, 265.


  CHAPTER XV

  THE SWISS AND ITALIAN GROUPS                                276-292

  _Swiss cheese_: The Swiss factory, 266; The milk, 267;
  Rennet extract, 268; Starter, 269; The making process,
  270; Curing Swiss, 271; Block Swiss, 272; Shipment, 273;
  Qualities of Swiss cheese, 274; Composition and yield,
  275; _The Italian group_: Parmesan, 276; Regianito, 277.


  CHAPTER XVI

  MISCELLANEOUS VARIETIES AND BY-PRODUCTS                     293-296

  Caciocavallo, 278; Sap sago, 279; Albumin cheese, 280;
  Mysost, Norwegian whey cheese, 281; Whey butter, 282.


  CHAPTER XVII

  CHEESE FACTORY CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT, ORGANIZATION        297-310

  Locating the site, 283; The building, 284; Heating plant,
  285; Curing-rooms, 286; Light, 287; Ventilation, 288;
  Boiler-room, 289; whey tanks, 290; Store-room, 291; The
  floors, 292; Arrangement of machinery and rooms, 293;
  Arrangements for cleanliness, 294; Equipment and supplies
  list, 295; Factory organization, 296.


  CHAPTER XVIII

  HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHEESE INDUSTRY IN AMERICA   311-326

  The factory system, 297; Introduction of factory system in
  Canada, 298; Introduction of cheddaring, 299; Introduction
  of Swiss and Limburger, 300; Number and distribution of
  cheese factories, 301; Total production of cheese in the
  United States, 302; Rank of the leading cheese-producing
  states, 303; Exportation and importation of cheese by the
  United States, 304; Average yearly price of cheese, 305;
  Canadian cheese statistics, 306; Introduction of
  cheese-making into new regions, 307.


  CHAPTER XIX

  TESTING                                                     327-342

  The fat test, 308; Sampling the milk, 309; Adding the
  acid, 310; Centrifuging, 311; Reading the test, 312;
  testing whey for fat, 313; testing cheese for fat, 314;
  Reading the test, 315; The Hart casein test, 316; Solids
  in the milk, 317; the lactometer, 318; Calculating the
  solids not fat in the milk, 319; Testing cheese for
  moisture, 320.


  CHAPTER XX

  MARKETING                                                   343-361

  Buying milk, 321; Cheese yield basis of buying milk, 322;
  Fat basis for payment of milk, 323; Weight basis or
  pooling method for payment of milk, 324; Fat-plus-two
  method for payment of milk, 325; Comparison of methods,
  326; Laws governing the production and sale of milk, 327;
  Marketing of cheese, 328; Mercantile exchanges, 329;
  Marketing perishable varieties, 330; Distribution of
  price, 331; Standards, 332; Laws relating to cheese
  marketing, 333.


  CHAPTER XXI

  CHEESE IN THE HOUSEHOLD                                     362-381

  Food value of cheese, 334; Digestibility of cheese, 335;
  Cheese flavor, 336; Relation to health, 337; Cheese
  poisoning, 338; Proper place in the diet, 339; Care of
  cheese, 340; Food value and price, 341; Methods and
  recipes for using cheese, 342.




THE BOOK OF CHEESE




CHAPTER I

_GENERAL STATEMENT ON CHEESE_


Cheese is a solid or semi-solid protein food product manufactured from
milk. Its solidity depends on the curdling or coagulation of part or all
of the protein and the expulsion of the watery part or whey. The
coagulum or curd so formed incloses part of the milk-serum (technically
whey) or watery portion of the milk, part of the salts, part or all of
the fat, and an aliquot part of the milk-sugar. The loss in manufacture
includes a small fraction of the protein and fat, the larger proportion
of the water, salts and milk-sugar.

+1. Nature of cheese.+--Milk of itself is an exceedingly perishable
product. Cheese preserves the most important nutrient parts of the milk
in condition for consumption over a much longer period. The duration of
this period and the ripening and other changes taking place depend very
closely on the composition of the freshly made cheese. There is an
intimate relation between the water, fat, protein and salt-content of
the newly made cheese and the ripening processes which produce the
particular flavors of the product when it is ready for the consumer.
This relation is essentially biological. A cheese containing 60 to 75
per cent of water, as in "cottage cheese" (the sour-milk cheese so
widely made in the homes), must be eaten or lost in a very few days.
Spoilage is very rapid. In contrast to this, the Italian Parmesan, with
30 to 32 per cent of water, requires two to three years for proper
ripening.

The cheeses made from soured skim-milk probably represent the most
ancient forms of cheese-making. Their origin is lost in antiquity. The
makers of Roquefort cheese cite passages from Pliny which they think
refer to an early form of that product. It is certain that cheese in
some form has been familiar to man throughout historic times. The
technical literature of cheese-making is, however, essentially recent.
The older literature may be cited to follow the historical changes in
details of practice.

+2. Cheese-making as an art+ has been developed to high stages of
perfection in widely separate localities. The best known varieties of
cheese bear the geographical names of the places of their origin. The
practices of making and handling such cheeses have been developed in
intimate relation to climate, local conditions and the habits of the
people. So close has been this adjustment in some cases, that the
removal of expert makers of such cheeses to new regions has resulted in
total failure to transplant the industry.

+3. Cheese-making as a science+ has been a comparatively recent
development. It has been partly a natural outgrowth of the desire of
emigrant peoples to carry with them the arts of their ancestral home,
partly the desire to manufacture at home the good things met in foreign
travel. Its development has been largely coincident with the development
of the agricultural school and the science of dairy biology. Even now
we have but a limited knowledge of a few of the 500 or more varieties of
cheese named in the literature. It is desirable to bring together the
knowledge of underlying principles as far as they are known.

No technical description of a cheese-handling process can replace
experience. Descriptions of appearances and textures of curd in terms
definite enough to be understood by beginners have been found to be
impossible. It is possible, however, to lay down principles and
essentials of practice which are common to the industry and form the
foundation for intelligent work. Cheese-making will be a science only as
we depart from the mere repetition of a routine or rule-of-thumb
practice and understand the underlying principles.

+4. Problems in cheese-making.+--Any understanding of these problems
calls for a working knowledge of the very complex series of factors
involved. These include the chemical composition of the milk, the nature
of rennet and character of its action under the conditions met in
cheese-making, the nature of the micro-organisms in milk, and the
methods of controlling them, their relation to acidity and to the
ripening of the cheese. To these scientific demands must be added
acquaintance with the technique of the whole milk industry, from its
production and handling on the farm through the multiplicity of details
of factory installation and organization, to those intangible factors
concerned with the texture, body, odor and taste of the varied products
made from it. Some of these factors can be adequately described; others
have thus far been handed on from worker to worker but have baffled
every effort at standardization or definition.

+5. History.+--The recorded history of the common varieties of cheese is
only fragmentary. Practices at one time merely local in origin followed
the lines of emigration. Records of processes of manufacture were not
kept. The continuance of a particular practice depended on the skill and
memory of the emigrant, who called his cheese after the place of origin.
Other names of the same kind were applied by the makers for selling
purposes. The widely known names were thus almost all originally
geographical. Some of them, such as Gorgonzola, are used for cheeses not
now made at the places whose names they bear. Naturally, this method of
development has produced national groups of cheeses which have many
common characteristics but differ in detail. The English cheeses form a
typical group of this kind.

Emigration to America carried English practices across the Atlantic. The
story of cheese-making in America has been so closely linked with the
development of the American Cheddar process that the historical aspects
of the industry in this country are considered under that head in
Chapter VIII.




CHAPTER II

_THE MILK IN ITS RELATION TO CHEESE_


The opaque whitish liquid, secreted by the mammary glands of female
mammals for the nourishment of their young, is known as milk. The milk
of the cow is the kind commonly used for cheese-making in America.

+6. Factors affecting the quality.+--The process of cheese-making begins
with drawing the milk from the udder. The care and treatment the milk
receives, while being drawn, and its subsequent handling, have a decided
influence on its qualities. The process of cheese-making is varied
according to the qualities of the milk. There are five factors that
influence the quality of the milk for cheese-making: (1) its chemical
composition; (2) the flavor of feed eaten by the cow; (3) the absorption
of flavors and odors from the atmosphere; (4) the health of the cow; (5)
the bacteria present. The first factor is dependent on the breed and
individuality of the cow. The other four factors are almost entirely
within the control of man. Of these factors, number five is of the most
importance, and is the one most frequently neglected.

+7. Chemical composition.+--The high, low and average composition of
milk is approximately as follows:

  TABLE I

  COMPOSITION OF MILK

  --------+-------+------+--------+-------+---------+-----
          | WATER | FAT  | CASEIN | SUGAR | ALBUMIN | ASH
          |  PER  | PER  |  PER   |  PER  |   PER   | PER
          | CENT  | CENT |  CENT  | CENT  |   CENT  | CENT
  --------+-------+------+--------+-------+---------+-----
  High    | 88.90 | 5.50 |  3.00  | 5.00  |   .72   | .73
  Low     | 85.05 | 3.00 |  2.10  | 4.60  |   .70   | .70
  Average | 87.47 | 3.80 |  2.50  | 4.80  |   .71   | .72
  --------+-------+------+--------+-------+---------+-----

+8. Factors causing variation in composition.+--The composition of cow's
milk varies according to several factors. The composition of the milk of
different breeds differs to such a degree that whole series of factories
are found with lower or higher figures than these averages on account of
dominant presence of particular kinds of cattle.

The following table shows the usual effect of breed on fat and total
solids of milk:

  TABLE II

  THE USUAL EFFECT OF BREED OF COWS ON FAT AND TOTAL
  SOLIDS OF MILK

  ------------------+------------------------
                    |       AVERAGES
  BREED OF COWS     +----------+-------------
                    |   Fat    | Total Solids
                    | Per Cent |   Per Cent
  ------------------+----------+-------------
  Jersey            |   5.62   |    14.74
  Guernsey          |   5.34   |    14.70
  Shorthorn         |   4.17   |    13.41
  Ayrshire          |   3.61   |    12.72
  Holstein-Friesian |   3.30   |    11.89
  ------------------+----------+-------------

The figures[1] in Tables I and II are compiled and averaged from a large
number of analyses made at different agricultural experiment stations.

This variation not only affects the fat, but all constituents of the
milk. While there is a difference in the composition of the milk from
cows of different breeds, there is almost as wide variation in the
composition of the milk from single cows[2] of the same breed. With the
same cow the stage of lactation causes a wide variation in the
composition of the milk.[3] As the period of lactation advances, the
milk increases in percentage of fat and other solids.

+9. Milk constituents.+--From the standpoint of the cheese-maker, the
significant constituents of milk are water, fat, casein, milk-sugar,
albumin, ash and enzymes. These will be discussed separately.

+10. Water.+--The retention of the solids and the elimination of the
water are among the chief considerations in cheese-making. Water forms
84 to 89 per cent of milk. Cheese-making calls for the reduction of this
percentage to that typical of the particular variety of cheese desired
with the least possible loss of milk solids. This final percentage
varies from 30 to 70 per cent with the variety of cheese. The water has
two uses in the cheese: (1) It imparts smoothness and mellowness to the
body of the cheese; (2) it furnishes suitable conditions for the action
of the ripening agents. To some extent the water may supplement or even
replace fat in its effect on the texture of the cheese. If the cheese is
properly made, the water present is in such combination as to give no
suggestion of a wet or "leaky" product.

+11. Fat.+--Fat is present in the milk in the form of suspended small
transparent globules (as an emulsion). These globules vary in size with
the breed and individuality of the cow and in color from a very light
yellow to a deep yellow shade as sought in butter. Milk with small fat
globules is preferred for cheese-making, because these are not so easily
lost in the process. Milk-fat is made up of several different compounds
called glycerids,[4] which are formed by the union of an organic acid
with glycerine as a base.

Fat is important in cheese-making for two reasons: (1) Its influence on
the yield of cheese; (2) its effect on the quality of the cheese. Many
of the details of cheese-making processes have been developed to prevent
the loss of fat in manufacture. The yield of cheese is almost directly
in proportion to the amount of fat in the milk; nevertheless, because
the solids not fat do not increase exactly in proportion to the fat, the
cheese yield is not exactly in proportion to the fat. The fat, however,
is a good index of the cheese-producing power of the milk.

+12. Casein.+--Cheese-making is possible because of the peculiar
properties of casein. This is the fundamental substance of cheese-making
because it has the capacity to coagulate or curdle under the action of
acid and rennet enzymes. Casein is an extremely complex organic
compound.[5] Authorities disagree regarding its exact composition, but
it contains varying amounts of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen,
phosphorus and sulfur, and it usually is combined with some form
of lime or calcium phosphate. It belongs to the general class of
nitrogen-containing compounds called proteins. It is present in milk in
the form of extremely minute gelatinous particles in suspension. Casein
is insoluble in water and dilute acids. The acids, when added, cause a
heavy, white, more or less flocculent precipitate. Rennet (Chapter III)
causes the casein to coagulate (curdle), forming a jelly-like mass
called curd, which is the basis of manufacture in most types of cheese.
In the formation of this coagulum (curd), the fat is imprisoned and
held. The casein compounds in the curd hold the moisture and give
firmness and solidity of body to the cheese. Casein contains the protein
materials in which important ripening changes take place. These changes
render the casein more soluble, and are thought to be the source of
certain characteristic cheese flavors.

+13. Milk-sugar.+--Milk-sugar (lactose) is present in solution in the
watery part of the milk. It forms on the average about 5 per cent of
cow's milk. Since it is in solution, cheese retains the aliquot part of
the total represented by the water-content of the cheese, plus any part
of the sugar which has entered into combination with the milk solids
during the souring process. The larger part of the lactose passes off
with the whey. Lactose[6] is attacked by the lactic-acid bacteria and by
them is changed to lactic acid. Cheeses in which this souring process
goes on quickly, soon contain a large enough percentage of acid to check
the rotting of the cheese by decay organisms. Without this souring, most
varieties of cheese will begin to spoil quickly. For each variety there
is a proper balance between the souring, which interrupts the growth of
many kinds of putrefactive bacteria, and the development of the forms
which are essential to proper ripening.

+14. Albumin.+--This is a form of protein which is in solution in the
milk. Albumin forms about 0.7 per cent of cow's milk. It is not
coagulated by rennet. Most rennet cheeses, therefore, retain only that
portion of the total albumin held in solution in the water retained, as
in the case of milk-sugar. Albumin is coagulated by heat, forming a film
or membrane upon the surface. There are certain kinds of cheese, such
as Ricotte, made by the recovery of albumin by heating.

+15. Ash.+--The ash or mineral constituents make up about 0.7 per cent
of cow's milk. This total includes very small amounts of a great many
substances. The exact form of some of the substances is still unknown.
Of these salts, the calcium or lime and phosphorus salts are most
important in cheese-making. They are partially or completely
precipitated by pasteurization. After such precipitation rennet fails to
act[7] or acts very slowly; hence pasteurized milk cannot be used for
making rennet cheese unless the lost salts are replaced, or the
condition of the casein is changed by the addition of some substance,
before curdling is attempted.

+16. Enzymes.+--Milk also contains enzymes. These are chemical ferments
secreted by the udder. They have the power to produce changes in organic
compounds without themselves undergoing any change. Minute amounts of
several enzymes are found in milk as follows: Diastase, galactase,
lipase, catalase, peroxidase and reductase. Just what part they play in
cheese-making is not definitely known.

+17. The flavor of feeds eaten by the cow.+--Undesirable flavors in the
milk are due many times to the use of feed with very pronounced flavors.
The most common of these feeds are onions, garlic, turnips, cabbage,
decayed ensilage, various weeds and the like. These undesirable flavors
reach the milk because the substances are volatile and are able to pass
through the tissues of the animal. While feed containing these flavors
is being digested, these volatile substances are not only present in
the milk, but in all the tissues of the animal. By the time the process
of digestion is completed, the volatile flavors have largely passed
away. Therefore, if the times of milking and feeding are properly
regulated, a dairy-man may feed considerable quantities of
strong-flavored products, such as turnip, cabbage and others, without
any appreciable effect on the flavor of the milk. To accomplish this
successfully, the cows should be fed immediately before or immediately
after milking, preferably after milking. This allows time for the
digestive process to take place and for the volatile substances to
disappear. If, however, milking is performed three or four hours after
feeding, these volatile substances are present in the milk and flavor
it.[8]

In the case of those plants which grow wild in the pasture, and to which
the cows have continued access, it is more difficult to prevent bad
flavor in the milk. The cows may be allowed to graze for a short time
only, and that immediately after milking, without affecting the flavor
of the milk. This will make it necessary to supplement the pasture with
dry feed, or to have another pasture where these undesirable plants do
not grow.

Undesirable flavors are usually noticeable in the milk when the cows are
turned out to pasture for the first time in the spring; and when they
are pastured on rank fall feed, such as second growth clover.

+18. Absorption of odors.+--Milk, especially when warm, possesses a
remarkable ability to absorb and retain odors from the surrounding
atmosphere.[9] For this reason, the milk should be handled only in
places free from such odor. Some of the common sources of these
undesirable odors are bad-smelling stables, strong-smelling feeds in the
stable, dirty cows, aërating milk near hog-pens, barn-yards and swill
barrels. The only way to prevent these undesirable flavors and odors is
not to expose the milk to them. The safest policy is to remove the
source of the odor.

+19. Effect of condition of the cow.+--Any factor which affects the cow
is reflected in the composition and physiological character of the milk.
(1) Colostrum. Milk secreted just before or just after parturition is
different in physical properties and chemical composition from that
secreted at any other time during the lactation period. This milk is
known as colostrum. It is considered unfit for human food, either as
milk or in products manufactured from the milk. Most states[10] consider
colostrum adulterated milk, and prohibit the sale of the product for
fifteen days preceding and for five days after parturition. (2) Disease.
When disease is detected in the cow, the milk should at once be
discarded as human food. Some diseases are common both to the cow and to
man, such as tuberculosis, foot-and-mouth disease. If such diseases are
present in the cow, the milk may act as a carrier to man. Digestive
disorders of any sort in the cow are frequently accompanied by
undesirable flavors in the milk. These are not thought to be due to the
feed, but to the abnormal condition of the cow. When the normal
condition is restored, these undesirable flavors disappear.

+20. Bacteria in the milk.+--Bacteria are microscopic unicellular
plants, without chlorophyll. Besides bacteria, there are other forms of
the lower orders of plants found in milk, such as yeasts and molds.
While the bacteria are normally the more important, frequently yeasts
and molds produce significant changes in milk and other dairy products.
Bacteria are very widely distributed throughout nature. They are so
small that they may easily float in the air or on particles of dust.
Many groups of bacteria are so resistant to adverse conditions of growth
that they may be present in a dormant or spore stage, and, therefore,
not be easily recognized; when suitable environments for growth are
again produced, development begins at once. They are found in all
surface water, in the earth and upon all organic matter. There are a
great many different groups of bacteria; some are beneficial, and some
are harmful. As they are so small, it is difficult to differentiate
between the beneficial and harmful kinds, except by the results
produced, or by a careful study in an especially equipped laboratory.
The bacteria multiply very rapidly. This is brought about by fission;
that is, the cell-walls are drawn in at one place around the cell, and
when the walls unite at the center, the cell is divided. There are then
two bacteria. In some cases, division takes place in twenty to thirty
minutes. Like other plants, they are very sensitive to food supply, to
temperature and to moisture, as conditions of growth. Inasmuch as the
bacteria are plant cells, they must absorb their food from materials in
solution. They may live on solid substances, but the food elements must
be rendered soluble before they can be used. Most bacteria prefer a
neutral or slightly acid medium for growth, rather than an alkaline
reaction. Ordinary milk makes a very favorable medium for the growth of
bacteria, because it is an adequate and easily available food supply.

In milk, certain groups of bacteria are commonly present, but many
others which happen to get into it live and multiply rapidly. A
favorable temperature is very necessary for such organisms to multiply.
There is a range of temperature, more or less wide, at which each group
of bacteria grows and multiplies with the greatest rapidity. This range
varies with the different groups, but most of them find temperatures
between 75° F. and 95° F. the most favorable for growth. Excessive heat
kills the bacteria. Low temperatures stop growth, but kill few if any
bacteria. Temperatures of 50° F. and lower retard the growth of most
forms of bacteria found commonly in milk. Many forms will slowly
develop, however, below 50° and some growth will occur down to the
freezing point. Milk held at 50° F. or lower will remain in good
condition long enough to be handled without injury to quality until
received in the cheese factory. In the place of seeds, some groups of
bacteria form spores. The spores are exceedingly resistant to
unfavorable conditions of growth, such as heat, cold, drying, food
supply and even chemical agents. This property makes it difficult to
destroy such bacteria.

+21. Groups of bacteria in milk.+--Milk when first drawn usually shows
an amphoteric reaction; that is, it will give the acid and alkaline
reactions with litmus paper. Under normal conditions, milk soon begins
to undergo changes, due to the bacteria. Changes produced in this way
are called "fermentations"; the agents causing them, "ferments."
Normally the acid fermentation takes place first, and later other
fermentations or changes begin, which, after a time, so decompose the
milk that it will not be suitable for cheese-making or human
consumption.

The following grouping of the organisms in milk is based on their
effects on the milk itself[11]:

    I. Acid-producing types.
   II. Peptonizing types.
  III. Inert types.
   IV. Alkali-producing types.
    V. Butyric fermenting types.

Each type of bacteria produces more or less specific changes in the
milk. As a general rule, the predominance of one of these types is an
aid in the interpretation of the quality of the product at the time of
analysis, such as the age, the temperature at which it has been held,
the conditions under which it was produced and, in some cases, the
general source of the contamination. The reaction due to certain
bacteria is utilized in the manufacture and handling of dairy products;
other groups have deleterious effects. (See Fig. 2.)

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Effect of different fermentations of milk: _U_,
Curd pitted with gas holes; _G_ and _O_, gassy curds which float; _K_,
smooth, solid desirable curd.]

+22. Acid fermentation of milk.+--By far the most common and important
fermentation taking place in milk is due to the action of the lactic
acid-forming bacteria on the milk-sugar or lactose. The bacteria that
bring about this fermentation may be divided into several groups on the
basis of their morphology, proteolytic activity, gas production,
temperature adaptation and production of substances other than lactic
acid. The larger number of organisms producing lactic acid in milk also
produce other organic acids in greater or less abundance. Inasmuch as
lactic acid is the principal substance produced, they are called lactic
acid organisms. This group contains different kinds of organisms which
may be subdivided into small groups as follows:

  (a) _Bacterium lactis-acidi_ group.
  (b) _Bacterium colon-aërogenes_ group.
  (c) Acid peptonizing group.
  (d) _Bacillus bulgaricus_ group.
  (e) Acid cocci or weak acid-producing group.

+23. Bacterium lactis-acidi group.+--There are many strains or varieties
in this group which are closely related in their activities. They are
universally present in milk and are commonly the greatest causal agent
in its souring. They are widely distributed in nature. At a temperature
of 65° F. to 95° F., these bacteria grow and multiply very rapidly; at
70° F. (approximately 20° C.) these forms usually outgrow all others.
The total amount of acid produced in milk by these organisms varies from
0.6 of one per cent to 1 per cent acid calculated as pure lactic acid.
These forms coagulate milk to a smooth curd of uniform consistency. In
addition to the lactic acid, there are produced traces of acetic,
succinic, formic and proprionic acids, traces of certain alcohols,
aldehydes and esters. Substances other than lactic acid are not produced
by organisms of this group to such an extent as to impart undesirable
flavors to the milk. The action of this group on the milk proteins is
very slight. They produce no visible sign of peptonization. The _B.
lactis-acidi_ group of organisms are essential to the production of the
initial acidity necessary in most types of cheese. The practical culture
and utilization of them for this purpose under factory conditions are
discussed in Chapter IV, entitled "Lactic Starters."

+24. Colon-aërogenes group.+--This group takes its name from a typical
species, _Bacterium coli communis_, which is a normal inhabitant of the
intestines of man and animals, and from _Bacterium coli aerogenes_,
which is similar in many respects to _B. coli communis_. The initial
presence of these bacteria in milk is indicative of fecal contamination
or unclean conditions of production. These organisms, however, grow and
develop in milk very rapidly at high temperatures of handling. The total
acidity produced by these forms is less than that by the _Bacterium
lactis-acidi_ group. Of the acid produced, less than 30 per cent is
lactic acid; the other acids are formic, acetic, proprionic and
succinic. The large percentage of these acids, with comparatively large
amounts of certain alcohols, aldehydes and esters, invariably impart
undesirable flavors and odors to the milk. Members of this group
uniformly ferment the lactose with the production of the gases, carbon
dioxide and hydrogen. The milk is coagulated into a lumpy curd,
containing gas pockets.

+25. Acid peptonizing group.+--These are often associated with colon
organisms. The group includes those bacteria which coagulate milk with
an acid curd and subsequently partly digest it. They grow and multiply
rapidly at a temperature between 65° and 98° F. They impart undesirable
flavors and odors to the milk, which appear to be due to the formation
of acids other than lactic acid, and to action on the milk proteins.

+26. Bacillus bulgaricus group.+--These organisms grow best at a
temperature of 105° to 115° F. They will develop at lower temperatures,
but not so rapidly. They survive heating to 135° F. without loss of
vigor, as occurs in Swiss cheese-making. They produce from 1 to 4 per
cent of acid in milk, which is practically all lactic acid. They do not
produce gas. They impart no undesirable flavors to the milk.

+27. Acid cocci or weak acid-producers.+--This group of organisms is not
very well defined. It consists mostly of coccus forms, commonly found
in the air and in the udder. Their presence in the milk may indicate
direct udder contamination. These are regarded as of little importance,
unless in very large number, and they have been only partially studied.
They produce little or no lactic acid, and small amounts of acetic,
proprionic, butyric and caproic acids. These forms rarely create enough
acid to coagulate milk.

+28. Peptonizing organisms.+--This group includes all bacteria which
have a peptonizing effect on the milk. It includes the acid peptonizing
organisms, although they are of primary importance in the acid type of
bacteria, because the acid-producing power is greater than the
peptonizing power. Some of the specific organisms in this class are
_Bacillus subtilis_, _Bacterium prodigiosus_ and _Bacterium
liquefaciens_. These are commonly found in soil water and in fecal
material. The presence of these organisms denotes contamination from
such sources.

+29. Inert types.+--As the name indicates, these are organisms not known
to have an appreciable effect on milk. The ordinary tests fail to
connect them with important processes; hence they appear to feed upon,
but not to affect the milk in any serious way. Milk ordinarily contains
more or less of these organisms, but no particular significance is
attached to their presence.

+30. Alkali-producing bacteria.+--This group of organisms has only
recently been studied in relation to its action on milk. Investigators
still disagree as to the usual percentage in the normal milk flora.
Their presence in milk has been considered to be relatively unimportant.

+31. Butyric fermenting types.+--Organisms causing butyric fermentation
may be present in the milk, but seldom become active, because they are
commonly anaërobic and so will not develop in milk kept under ordinary
conditions, and the rapid growth of the lactic acid-forming bacteria
prevents their growth. These organisms act on the milk-fat, decomposing
it. Butyric acid fermentations are more common in old butter and cheese.
In these, the fermentation causes a rancid flavor.

+32. Molds and yeasts.+--The cattle feed and the air of the barn always
contain considerable numbers of yeasts and mold spores. Yeasts have been
found by Hastings[12] to cause an objectionable fermentation in
Wisconsin cheese. No further study of this group as factors in
cheese-handling has been reported. Mold spores, especially those of the
blue or green molds (Penicillum sp.) and the black molds (Mucors), are
always abundant in milk. These spores are carried into all cheeses made
from unpasteurized milk, in numbers sufficient to cover the cheeses
with mold if they are permitted to grow. Pasteurization[13] kills
most of them. The border-line series commonly referred to as the
streptothrix-actinomyces group are also very abundant in all forage and
are carried in large numbers into all milk and its products.

+33. Bacterial contamination of milk.+--When drawn from the cow, milk is
seldom if ever sterile. Organisms usually work their way from the tip of
the teat into the udder and multiply there. The fore milk usually
contains more organisms than does that drawn later. Most of the
bacterial contamination of the milk is due to the handling after it is
drawn from the cow.

+34. Germicidal effect of milk.+--Authorities agree that when a
bacterial examination of the milk is made, hour by hour, beginning as
soon as it is drawn from the cow, there is no increase in the number of
organisms for a period of several hours at first, but an actual
reduction not infrequently takes place. This is called the
"germicidal"[14] property of milk. The lower the temperature of the
milk, the longer and less pronounced is the germicidal action; the
higher the temperature, the shorter and more pronounced is this action.

This is explained as either: (1) a period of selection within which
types of bacteria entering by accident and unadapted for growth die off;
or (2) an actual weak antiseptic power in the milk-serum itself; or (3)
the forming of clusters by the bacteria and so reducing the count.

In working on a small scale or on an experimental basis, this property
at times introduces a factor of difficulty or error which is not to be
lost sight of in the selection of the milk for such purposes.

+35. Sources and control of bacteria in milk.+--Most of the bacterial
infection of milk is due to lack of care in handling. Some of the common
sources[15] of contamination are: the air in the stable; the cow's body;
the milker; the utensils; the method of handling the milk after it is
drawn from the cow; unclean cheese factory conditions.

Since bacteria cause various kinds of fermentation, not only in the
milk but in the products manufactured from it, the question of their
control is of prime importance. There are two ways in which the
bacterial growth in milk used for cheese-making may be controlled: (1)
prevention of infection; (2) the retardation of their development when
present. The former is accomplished by strict cleanliness, the latter by
adequate cooling.

+36. The cow.+--The body of the cow may be a source of bacterial
contamination. Bacteria adhere to the hair of the animal, and to the
scales of the skin, and during the process of milking these are very
liable to fall into the milk. To prevent this, the cow should be curried
to remove all loose material and hair. Just before milking, the udder
and flank should be wiped with a damp cloth; this removes some of the
material, and causes the remainder to adhere to the cow.

+37. Stable air.+--If the air of the stable is not clean, it will be a
source of contamination. Particles of dust floating in the air carry
more or less bacteria, and these fall into the milk during the process
of milking. To keep the stable air free from dust at milking time, all
operations which stir up dust, such as feeding, brushing the cows,
cleaning the floor, should be practiced after milking or long enough
before so that the dust will have settled. It is a good plan to close
the doors and to sprinkle the floor just before milking.

+38. The milker+ himself may be a source of contamination. He should be
clean and wear clean clothing. The hands should not be wet with milk
during milking.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Types of small-top milk pails.]

+39. Utensils.+--The utensils are an important source of bacterial
contamination. The bacteria lodge in the seams and corners unless these
are well-flushed with solder. From these seams they are not easily
removed. When fresh warm milk is placed into such utensils, the bacteria
begin to grow and multiply. All utensils with which milk comes in
contact should first be rinsed with cold water and then thoroughly
washed and finally scalded with boiling water, and drained or blown
absolutely dry. They should then be placed in an atmosphere free from
dust until wanted for use again. If an aërator is used, this should be
operated in pure air, free from odors and dust. One of the greatest
sources of bacterial contamination of cheese milk is the use of the
milk-cans to return whey to the farms for pig feed. Frequently, sour
whey is left in the cans until ready to feed. These cans are then not
properly washed and scalded. The practice of pasteurizing the whey at
the cheese factory is a great help in preventing this source of
infection and the spreading of disease.

The use of a small-top milk pail[16] is to be especially recommended in
preventing bacterial contamination. Because of the small opening,
bacteria cannot easily fall into the milk in as large numbers as when
the whole top of the pail is open. (See Fig. 3.)

If a milking machine[17] is used, great care must be exercised to see
that all parts that come in contact with the milk are cleaned after each
milking, and then put in a clean place until ready to use again.

+40. The factory.+--Another source of contamination is the cheese
factory itself. The cheese-maker should keep his factory in the cleanest
condition possible, not only because of the effect on the milk itself,
but as a stimulus for the producers to follow his example. All doors and
windows in the factory should be screened to keep out flies.

+41. The control of bacteria.+--If, in spite of preventive measures,
bacteria get into the milk, their growth can be retarded by controlling
the temperature. If the temperature of the milk, as soon as drawn, can
be reduced below that at which the bacteria grow and multiply rapidly,
it will retard their development. In general, all milk should be cooled
to 50° F. or below. In cooling the milk, it should not be exposed to
dust or odors. One of the best methods of cooling is to set the can
containing the milk into a tub of cold running water, and then stir. If
running water is not available, cold well-water[18] may be used, but the
water should be changed several times. If the milk is not stirred during
the cooling process, it will not cool so rapidly, because the layer of
milk next the can will become cold and act as an insulator to the
remainder in the center of the can.

One way to destroy many of the bacteria in milk is by pasteurization.
This consists in heating the milk to such a degree that the bacteria are
killed, and then quickly cooling it. After pasteurization, the milk is
so changed that some kinds of cheese cannot be made successfully.

+42. Fermentation test.+--When a cheese-maker is having trouble with gas
in his cheese, or bad flavors, he can generally locate the source of
difficulty. This can be done by making a small amount of cheese from
each patron's milk, called a fermentation test.[19] Pint or quart fruit
jars or milk bottles make suitable containers. They should be thoroughly
washed and scalded, to be sure they are clean and sterile, and then
covered to prevent contamination. As the milk is delivered to the
factory, a sample is taken of each patron's milk. The best way to secure
the sample is to dip the sterile jar in the can of milk as delivered and
fill two-thirds full of milk.

The jars are then set in water at 110° F. to bring the temperature of
the milk to 98° F. The jar should be kept covered. A sink or wash-tub
makes a convenient place in which to keep the jars. When the temperature
of the milk is 98° F., ten drops of rennet extract or pepsin is added to
each jar. A uniform temperature of 98° F. should be maintained in the
jars. This will necessitate the addition of warm water occasionally to
the water surrounding the jars. When the milk is coagulated, the curd is
broken up with a sterile knife. Precaution should be taken to sterilize
the knife after using it in one jar before putting it into another. The
best way to do this is to hold the knife for a minute in a pail of
boiling water, after taking it out of each jar. The same precaution
should be observed with the thermometer. Unless care is taken,
contamination is liable to be carried from one jar to the other. After
cutting, the whey is poured off. The temperature should be kept at 98°
F. so that the organisms will have a suitable temperature for growth.
The whey should be poured from the jars occasionally, usually about
every half hour.

As the fermentation takes place, different odors will be noticed in
different jars. In ten to twelve hours the jar should be finally
examined for odors and the curd taken out and cut to examine it for gas
pockets. By this means, bad flavors and gas in the cheese can be traced
to their sources.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--A gang sediment tester, one tester removed.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--A single sediment tester.]

+43. The sediment test.+--The presence of solid material or dirt in the
milk is always accompanied by bacterial contamination. By means of the
sediment test, the amount of solid material can be determined. The test
consists of filtering the milk through a layer of cotton; the foreign
material is left on the cotton filter. Various devices for filtering the
milk have been manufactured. (Figs. 4 and 5.) In order to be able to
compare the filters from the different dairy-men's milk, the same amount
of each patron's milk is filtered, usually about a pint. These tests are
usually made once or twice a month at the factory and the filters placed
on a card where the dairy-men can see them. Much improvement in the
quality of the milk has been accomplished by the use of the sediment
test. The purpose of this test may be and often is defeated by the use
of efficient strainers. Milk produced in an unclean way may be rendered
nearly free from sediment if carefully strained. It must be remembered
that the strainer takes out only the undissolved substances and that
bacteria and soluble materials which constitute a very large part of the
filth pass through with the milk.




CHAPTER III

_COAGULATING MATERIALS_


At the present time, two substances are used to coagulate milk for
cheese-making,--rennet extract and commercial pepsin.[20] Many
substances will coagulate milk, such as acids and other chemicals.
Enzymes in certain plants will also coagulate it.

The curing or ripening of the cheese seems to depend on the physical and
chemical properties of the curd, on the activity of certain organisms
and on enzymes produced by them or in the milk. Rennet extract and
pepsin are the only known substances which will produce curd of such
character as will permit the desired ripening changes to take place.
Until recently, rennet extract was principally used to coagulate the
milk, but because of the scarcity, pepsin is now being substituted.

+44. Ferments.+--Many of the common changes taking place in milk are due
to fermentations. The souring of milk is one of the most familiar cases
of fermentation. The important change taking place is the formation of
lactic acid from the milk-sugar. The change is brought about by certain
living organisms, namely, the lactic acid-forming bacteria. Another
familiar case of fermentation is the coagulation of milk by rennet
extract or pepsin. In this case, the change is produced by a chemical
substance, not a living organism. Fermentation may be defined as a
chemical change of an organic compound through the action of living
organisms or of chemical agents.

There are two general classes of ferments: (1) living organisms, or
organized ferments; (2) chemical, or unorganized ferments. Organized
ferments are living microorganisms, capable, as a result of their
growth, of causing the changes. Unorganized ferments are chemical
substances or ferments without life, capable of causing marked changes
in many complex organic compounds, while the enzymes themselves undergo
little or no change. These unorganized ferments are such as rennin,
pepsin, trypsin, ptyalin. The rennet and pepsin must, therefore, be very
thoroughly mixed into the milk to insure complete and uniform results,
because they act by contact, and theoretically, if they could be
recovered, might be used over and over again. Practically, the amount
used is so small a percentage that recovery would be impractical even if
possible.

+45. Nature of rennet.+--Two enzymes or ferments are found in rennet
extract, rennin and pepsin. They are prepared from the secreting areas
of living membranes of the stomachs of mammalian young. For
rennet-making, these stomachs are most valuable if taken before the
young have received any other feed than milk. Rennin at this stage
appears to predominate over pepsin which is already secreted to some
extent. With the inclusion of other feed, the secretion of pepsin comes
to predominate. Rennin has never been separated entirely from pepsin.
Both of these enzymes are secreted by digestive glands in the same area,
perhaps even by the same glands. They are so closely related that many
workers have regarded them as identical. In practical work the
effectiveness of rennet preparations has been greatest when stomachs
which have digested feed other than milk are excluded. The differences,
therefore, however difficult to define, appear to be important in the
commercial preparation of rennet.

It was the practice until a few years ago for each cheese-maker to
prepare his own rennet extract. Each patron was supposed to supply so
many rennets. Now commercial rennet extract and pepsin are on the
market; however, some Swiss cheese-makers prefer to make their own
rennet extract. For sheep's and goat's milk cheese, some makers hold
that rennet made from kid or lamb stomachs is best for handling the milk
of the respective species. The objection to the cheese-maker preparing
his own rennet extract is that it varies in strength from batch to batch
and is liable to spoil quickly. Taints and bad odors and flavors develop
in it and so taint the cheese.

+46. Preparation of rennet extract.+--This extract may be manufactured
commercially from digestive stomachs of calves, pigs or sheep. An animal
is given a full meal just before slaughtering; this stimulates a large
flow of the digestive juices, containing the desired enzymes.

The stomach is taken from the animal, cleaned, commonly inflated and
dried. It may be held in the dry condition until needed for use. Such
stomachs are usually spoken of as "rennets" in the trade. Such old
rennets may be seen to-day hanging from the rafters of some of the older
cheese factories. When wanted for use, rennets are placed in oak barrels
and covered with water. Before placing them in the barrel, they are cut
open so that the water may have easy access. Salt is usually added to
the water at the rate of 3 to 5 per cent. They are stirred and pounded
in this solution from five to seven days. At the end of this time, they
are wrung through a clothes-wringer to remove the liquid. The rennets
are put back into a fresh solution of salt and water, the object being
to obtain all the digestive juices possible. They are usually soaked
from four to six weeks. At the end of this time, most of the digestive
juices will have been removed. The liquid portion is passed through a
filter made of straw, charcoal and sand. When clean, an excess of salt
is added to preserve it.

Such extracts cannot be sterilized by heat because the necessary
temperature would destroy the enzyme. Effective disinfectants cannot be
used in food products. The extract, therefore, should be kept cool to
retard bacterial growth. The extract is kept in wooden barrels, stone
jugs or yellow glass bottles to protect it from light, which is able to
destroy its activity. Rennet extract should be clear, with a clean salty
taste and a distinct rennet flavor. There should be no cloudy appearance
and no muddy sediment in properly preserved rennet. Rennet extract is on
the market in the form of a liquid and a powder, the former being much
more common. The commercial forms of rennet have the advantage in the
skill used in their preparation and standardization. The combined
product from large numbers of stomachs may not be as effective a
preparation as the most skillfully produced sample from the very
choicest single stomach, but it gives a uniformity of result which
improves the average product greatly.

+47. Pepsin.+--Pepsin is on the market in several commercial forms, as a
liquid, scale pepsin and in a granular form known as spongy pepsin. Some
commercial concerns put out a preparation which is a mixture of rennet
extract and commercial pepsin.

+48. Chemistry of curdling.+--The chemistry of casein[21] and of curd
formation under the influence of acid and rennet extract and pepsin has
been the subject of many years' research. While many points remain
unsettled, the general considerations together with a large mass of
accepted facts may be presented and some of the unsolved problems
pointed out as left for future researches.

Casein is a white amorphous powder, practically insoluble in water. It
is an acid and as such readily dissolves in solutions of the hydroxides
or the carbonates of alkalies and alkaline earths by forming soluble
salts.

Pure casein salt solutions and fresh milk do not coagulate on boiling,
but in the presence of free acid coagulation may take place below the
boiling temperature. The coagulum formed in the case of milk includes
fat and calcium phosphate. The slight pellicle which coats over milk
when it is warmed is of the same composition.

+49. Use of acid.+--A commonly accepted explanation of the precipitation
of casein by acids is that the casein is held in solution by chemical
union with a base (lime in the case of milk); that added acid removes
the base, allowing the insoluble casein to precipitate; and that excess
of acid unites with casein, forming a compound which is more or less
readily soluble.

+50. Robertson's theory.+--According to Robertson's conception, in a
soluble solution of a protein or its salt, the molecules of the protein
unite with each other to a certain extent, in this way forming polymers.
The reaction is reversible, and the point of equilibrium between the
compound and its polymeric modification varies under the influence of
whatever condition affects the concentration of the protein ions.
Addition of water, or of acid, alkali or salt, or the application of
heat has such an effect, and consequently alters the relative number of
heavier molecule-complexes. Robertson's experiments give evidence that
one of the effects of increase of temperature on a solution of casein is
a shifting of the equilibrium in the direction of the higher complexes.
He explains coagulation as being a result of these molecular aggregates
becoming so large as to assume the properties of matter in mass and to
become practically an unstable suspension and then a precipitate. The
acid curd then is casein or some combination of casein with the
precipitant acid.

+51. Rennet curd.+--Rennet extract and pepsin coagulation differs from
coagulation by acids, and cannot be looked on as a simple removal of the
base from a caseinate. The presence of soluble calcium salts (or other
alkaline earth salts) seems to be essential, and the precipitate formed
is not casein or a casein salt, but a salt of a slightly different
nucleoalbumin called "paracasein." Many writers, following Halliburton,
call this modification produced by rennin the "casein" and that from
which it is derived, "caseinogen." Foster and a few others have used the
term "tyrein" for the rennet clot.

A number of investigations have been made on the conditions essential or
favorable to formation of the coagulum, especially with regard to the
effects of the degree of acidity and of conditions affecting the amount
of calcium present, either as free soluble salt or bound to the casein.
Soluble salts of calcium, barium and strontium favor or hasten
coagulation, while salts of ammonium, sodium and potassium retard or
prevent coagulation.

The bulk of the coagulum from milk is a calcium paracaseinate, but it
carries down with it calcium phosphate and fat, both of which bodies
have been helped to remain in their state of suspension in milk by the
presence of the casein salt. Lindet (1912) has concluded that about
one-half of the phosphorus contained in the rennet curd is in the form
of phosphate of lime (probably tricalcic), the other half being
organically combined phosphoric acid.

+52. Hammarsten's theory.+--According to Hammarsten (1877, 1896), whose
view has been commonly held, the distinctive effect of the ferment is
not precipitation but the transformation of casein into paracasein. This
is evidenced by the fact that if rennet be allowed to act on solutions
free from lime salts no precipitate occurs; but there is an invisible
alteration of the casein, for now, even if the ferment be destroyed by
boiling the solution, addition of lime salts will cause immediate
coagulation. (See also Spiro, 1906.) Hence the process of rennet
coagulation is a two-phase process; the first phase is the
transformation of casein by rennin, the second is the visible
coagulation caused by lime salts.

Furthermore, if the purest casein and the purest rennin were used,
Hammarsten always found after coagulation that the filtrate contained
very small amounts of a protein. This protein he designated as the "whey
protein."

In accordance with these observations, Hammarsten (1911) explains the
rennin action "as a cleavage process, in which the chief mass of the
casein, sometimes more than 90 per cent, is split off as paracasein, a
body closely related to casein, and in the presence of sufficient
amounts of lime salts the paracasein-lime precipitates out while the
proteose-like substance (whey-protein) remains in solution."

By continued action of rennin on paracasein, a further transformation
has been found in several cases (Petry, 1906; Van Herwerden, 1907; Van
Dam, 1909), but perhaps due to a contamination of the rennin with
pepsin, or to the identity of these two enzymes. The action which forms
paracasein and whey-protein takes place in a short time (Hammarsten,
1896; Schmidt-Nielson, 1906). The composition and solubilities of
paracasein have received considerable attention. (See Loevenhart, 1904;
Kikkoji, 1909; Van Slyke and Bosworth, 1912.) It is more readily
digested by pepsin-hydrochloric acid than is casein (Hosl, 1910).

+53. Duclaux theory.+--Duclaux (1884) and Loevenhart (1904) and others
do not accept Hammarsten's theory; but to most workers it seems
probable, at least, that the action of the rennin is to cause a cleavage
of casein with formation of paracasein. However, the chemical and
physical differences observed between casein and paracasein appear to be
so slight that Loevenhart and some others think that they are only
physical, perhaps differences in the size of the colloid or solution
aggregates. Loevenhart conceives of a large part of the work of the
rennet (or of the acid, in acid and heat coagulation) as being a freeing
of the calcium to make it available for precipitation. Some think that
the aggregates of paracasein are larger than those of casein, but there
is more evidence of their being smaller, which idea corresponds with the
findings of Bosworth, though he looks on the change as a true cleavage.

+54. Bang's theory.+--Another description of the precipitation is given
by Bang (1911), who studied the progress of the coagulation process by
means of interruptions at definite intervals. His observations confirm
the idea that rennin causes the formation of paracasein, and that the
calcium salt serves only for the precipitation of the paracasein; the
rennin has to do also with the mobilizing of lime salts. According to
Bang, before coagulation occurs, paracaseins with constantly greater
affinity for calcium phosphate are produced. These take up increasing
amounts of calcium phosphate, until finally the combination formed can
no longer remain in solution.

+55. Bosworth's theory.+--By a very recent work of L. L. Van Slyke and
A. W. Bosworth (Van Slyke and Bosworth, 1912, 1913; and Bosworth and Van
Slyke, 1913), in which ash-free casein and paracasein were compared as
to their elementary composition, and as to the salts they form with
bases, and the properties of these salts, it is indicated that the two
compounds are alike in percentage composition and in combining
equivalent, the paracasein molecule being one-half of the casein
molecule. Moreover, Bosworth (1913) has shown that, if the rennin
cleavage be carried out under conditions which avoid autohydrolysis, no
other protein is formed; also that, if the calcium caseinate present be
one containing four equivalents of calcium, the paracaseinate does not
precipitate, save in the presence of a soluble calcium salt, while, if
the calcium caseinate be one of two equivalents of base, rennin does
cause immediate coagulation. Bosworth concludes that the rennin action
is a cleavage (probably hydrolytic) of a molecule of caseinate into two
molecules of paracaseinate, the coagulation being a secondary effect due
to a change in solubilities, dicalcium paracaseinate being soluble in
pure water but not in water containing more than a trace of calcium
salt, and the monocalcium caseinate being insoluble in water. The alkali
paracaseinates, as well as caseinates, are soluble. This explanation
seems to promise to harmonize the observations with regard to acidity
and the effects of the presence of soluble salts. This theory
represents, therefore, many years of continuous work at the New York
Experiment Station centered primarily on American Cheddar cheese.
Disputed points remain for further study but these workers have
contributed much toward a clear description of the chemical constitution
of casein as affected by rennet action and bacterial activity.

The investigations of these authors and of Hart with regard to the
changes which the paracasein, the calcium and the phosphorus undergo
during the ripening of cheese (Van Slyke and Hart, 1902, 1905; Van Slyke
and Bosworth, 1907, 1913; Bosworth, 1907) contributed to this
interpretation.

   BANG, IVAR, Ueber die chemische Vorgang bei der
   Milchgerinnung durch Lab, Skand. Arch. Physiol. 25, pages
   105-144; through Jahresb. u. d. Fortsch. d. Thierchem.
   41, pages 221-222, 1911.

   BOSWORTH, A. W., The action of rennin on casein, N. Y.
   Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 31, 1913.

   BOSWORTH, A. W., Chemical studies of Camembert cheese, N.
   Y. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 5, 1907.

   BOSWORTH, A. W., and L. L. VAN SLYKE, Preparation and
   composition of basic calcium caseinate and paracaseinate,
   Jour. Biol. Chem. Vol. 14, pages 207-210, 1913.

   DUCLAUX, ÉMILE, Action de la présure sur le lait, Compt.
   Rend. Acad. Sci. 98, pages 526-528, 1884.

   HAMMARSTEN, OLOF, Zur Kenntnis des Caseins und der
   Wirkung des Labfermentes, Nova. Acta Regiae Soc. Sci.
   Upsaliensis in Memoriam Quattuor Saec. ab Univ.,
   Upsaliensi Peractorum, 1877.

   HAMMARSTEN, OLOF, Ueber das Verhalten des Paracaseins zu
   dem Labenzyme, Zeit. physiol. Chem. 22, pages 103-126,
   1896.

   HAMMARSTEN, OLOF, A text book of physiological chemistry,
   from the author's 7th German edition, 1911.

   HOSL, J., Unterschiede in der tryptischen und peptischen
   Spaltung des Caseins, Paracaseins und des
   Paracaseinkalkes aus Kuh- und Ziegenmilch, Inaug. Diss.
   Bern., 31 pp., 1910.

   KIKKOJI, T., Beitrage zur Kenntniss des Caseins und
   Paracaseins, Zeit. physiol. Chem. No. 61, pages 130-146,
   1909.

   LINDET, L., Solubilité des albuminoides du lait dans les
   éléments du sérum; rétrogradation de leur solubilité sous
   l'influence du chlorure, Bul. Soc. Chim. (ser. 4) 13,
   pages 929-935.

   LINDET, L., Sur les éléments mineraux contenus dans la
   caseine du lait, Rep. Eighth Internat. Congr. of Applied
   Chem. 19, 199-207, 1912.

   LOEVENHART, A. S., Ueber die Gerinnung der Milch, Zeit.
   physiol. Chem. 41, pages 177-205, 1904.

   PETRY, EUGEN, Ueber die Einwirkung des Labferments auf
   Kasein, Beitrage z. Chem. Physiol. u. Path. 8, pages
   339-364, 1906.

   ROBERTSON, T. BRAILSFORD, On the influence of temperature
   upon the solubility of casein in alkaline solutions,
   Jour. Biol. Chem. 5, pages 147-154, 1908.

   SCHMIDT-NIELSON, SIGVAL, Zur Kenntnis des Kaseins und der
   Labgerinnung, Upsala läkaref. Förh. (N. F.) No. 11,
   Suppl.

   Hammarsten Festschrift No. XV, 1-26; through Jahresb. u.
   d. Fortschr. d. Thierchem. No. 36, pages 255-256, 1906.

   SPIRO, K., Beeinflussung und Natur des Labungsvorganges,
   Beitrage z. Chem. Physiol. u. Path. 8, pages 365-369,
   1906.

   VAN DAM, W., Ueber die Wirkung des Labs Auf.
   Paracaseinkalks, Zeit. physiol. Chem. No. 61, pages
   147-163, 1909.

   VAN HERWERDEN, M., Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Labwirkung
   auf Casein, Zeit. physiol. Chem. 52, pages 184-206, 1907.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, I. Some of the
   first chemical changes in Cheddar cheese. II. The acidity
   of the water extract of Cheddar cheese, N. Y. Exp. Sta.
   Tech. Bul. 4, 1907.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, Composition and
   properties of some casein and paracasein compounds and
   their relations to cheese, N. Y. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 26,
   1912.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, Method of preparing
   ash-free casein and paracasein, Jour. Biol. Chem. Vol.
   14, pages 203-206, 1913.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, Preparation and
   composition of unsaturated or acid caseinates and
   paracaseinates, _Ibid._ Vol. 14, pages 211-225, 1913.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, Valency of
   molecules and molecular weights of casein and paracasein,
   _Ibid._ Vol. 14, pages 227-230, 1913.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and A. W. BOSWORTH, Composition and
   properties of the brine-soluble compounds in cheese,
   Jour. Biol. Chem. 14, pages 231-236, 1913.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and E. B. HART, A study of some of the
   salts formed by casein and paracasein with acids; their
   relations to American Cheddar cheese, N. Y. Exp. Sta.
   Bul. 214, 1902.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and E. B. HART, Casein and paracasein
   in some of their relations to bases and acids, American
   Chem. Jour. 33, pages 461-996, 1905.

   VAN SLYKE, L. L., and E. B. HART, Some of the relations
   of casein and paracasein to bases and acids, and their
   application to Cheddar cheese, N. Y. Exp. Sta. Bul. 261,
   1905.




CHAPTER IV

_LACTIC STARTERS_


Acidity in cheese-making arises almost exclusively from the lactic acid
produced from the fermentation of milk-sugar (lactose) by bacteria.
Hydrochloric acid is used in the Wisconsin[22] process of making
pasteurized milk cheese and sometimes for making skimmed-milk curd for
baking purposes. It is regularly used in precipitating casein not for
food but for manufacturing purposes.

+56. Acidifying organisms.+--Many species of bacteria have been shown to
possess the power to produce lactic acid by fermenting lactose. In
practice, however, the cheese-maker seeks to control this fermentation
by the actual introduction of the desired organisms and by the
production of conditions which will insure this dominance through
natural selection. For this purpose the initial souring for most types
of cheeses is produced by some variety of the species originally
described by Esten[23] and commonly referred to as _Bacterium
lactis-acidi_, but variously named as _B. acidi-lactici_, _Streptococcus
lacticus_, _B. guntheri_ by different authors. Organisms of this series
dominate all other species in milk which is incubated at 70° F. They
produce a smooth solid mass without a sign of gas holes and without the
separation of whey from the curd, and develop in milk a maximum acidity
of about 0.90 of one per cent when titrated as lactic acid. (For
titration see Chapter V.) This species is usually present in small
numbers in fresh milk. There are many varieties or strains of the
species with differing rates of activity and measurable differences in
acid produced but with approximately the same qualitative characters.
Most commercial starters for cheese- and butter-making belong to this
group of species, although special mixtures with other organisms are
prepared for special purposes. In addition to this group, most varieties
of cheese contain some members of the colon-aërogenes group. When the
milk is in proper condition, the activity of this group should be held
in check by the early and rapid development of acid. Free development of
members of this group usually shows itself in the presence of gas holes
in the curd.

+57. Starter.+--The practice of using pure cultures in cheese-making has
brought about the development of factory methods of producing day by day
cultures of the organisms desired, in quantities sufficient to inoculate
the total quantity of milk used in manufacture. For this purpose milk is
mostly used and the product is known as "starter." For cheese-making
purposes, a starter is a substance used in the manufacture of dairy
products having a predominance of lactic acid-forming microorganisms in
an active state. There are two general classes of starter: (1) Natural
starter; (2) commercial starter.

+58. Natural starter.+--Milk, or other similar substance, which has
become sour or in which large numbers of lactic acid-forming organisms
are present, is called a natural starter when used in the manufacture of
dairy products. To secure clean-flavored milk, the cheese-maker usually
selects the milk of some producer who usually brings good milk and
allows it to sour naturally for use the next day. There is often a
variation from day to day in the milk delivered by the same producer, so
that the cheese-maker is not certain of a uniform quality in his
fundamental material. While the lactic acid-forming organisms are
developing, other organisms may also be present in numbers sufficient to
produce bad flavors. If a starter has any objectionable flavor, it
should not be used. Natural starters very commonly develop objectionable
flavors which at first are very difficult to recognize. When natural
starters with objectionable but not easily recognizable odors are used,
the effect may be seen on the cheese. Milk, sour whey and buttermilk are
materials commonly used as natural starter. A common difficulty in
skimmed-milk cheese is caused by the use of buttermilk as a starter.

+59. Commercial starter or pure cultures.+--The alternative practice
consists in the introduction of pure cultures of known strains of lactic
bacteria into special milk to make the starter. Since these cultures
must be prepared by a bacteriologist, commercial laboratories have
developed a large business in their production. Many such commercial
brands are manufactured under trade-marked names. Some of these cultures
represent races of lactic bacteria cultivated and cared for efficiently,
hence uniformly valuable over long periods of time. Others carelessly
produced are worthless, or even a peril to the user.

These organisms are usually shipped in small quantities in bottles of
liquid or powder, or in capsules of uniform size. The contents may be
either the culture medium upon which the organisms grew or inert
substance designed merely to hold the bacteria in inactive form. In
either solid or liquid form, the producer of the culture should
guarantee its activity up to a plainly stated date.

It is the problem[24] of the cheese-maker or butter-maker to increase
this small amount of lactic acid-forming organisms to such numbers and
in such active condition that it may be used in the factory; while being
built up, these organisms must be kept pure. The usual practice is to
allow them to develop in some material, usually whole milk or
skimmed-milk; dissolved milk powder may be used in the place of milk.

+60. Manufacturer's directions.+--The manufacturer usually sends
directions with his starter preparation, telling how it should be used
to secure the best result. These directions apply to average conditions
and must be varied to suit the individual instances so that a good
starter will be the result. The directions usually state the amount of
milk necessary for the first inoculation. It is usually a small amount,
one or two quarts. After the specific amount has been selected, this
milk should be pasteurized.

+61. Selecting milk.+--The milk for use in starter-making should be
selected with very much care. Only clean-flavored sweet milk, free from
undesirable micro-organisms, should be used in the preparation of
starter. The milk is ordinarily chosen from a producer whose milk is
usually in good condition. The quality of the milk can be determined by
the use of the fermentation test. (See Chapter II.) It is better to
choose only the morning's milk for the making of starter, because the
bacteria have not had so much opportunity to develop. In no case should
the mixed milk be used in the preparation of starter, as this eliminates
all opportunity for selection. The flavor of the starter will be the
same as that of the milk from which it is made.

+62. Pasteurization+ is the process of heating to a high temperature for
a given length of time and quickly cooling. It kills most of the
micro-organisms in the milk. In other words, it makes a clean seed-bed
for the pure culture. The temperatures of pasteurization recommended for
starter-making differ with the authority. A temperature of 180° F. for
thirty minutes or longer seems to be very satisfactory, since under
these conditions nearly all the micro-organisms in the milk are killed.

+63. Containers.+--Various kinds of containers may be used for
starter-making. One-quart glass fruit jars or milk bottles make very
satisfactory containers, because the condition of the starter may be
seen at any time. They are also easily cleaned. They have the
disadvantage, however, of being easily broken, if the temperature is
suddenly changed, or if severely jarred. Tin containers may also be
used. Such containers are not easily broken, but they are harder to
clean and must be opened to examine the contents; hence the liability of
contamination is very much greater.

This small amount of milk may be pasteurized by placing the container in
water heated to the desired temperature. A very satisfactory arrangement
is to cut of a barrel, and place a steam pipe in it. The barrel can then
be filled partly full of water and heated by steam. The bottles of milk
to be pasteurized are hung in the water in the barrel. Two or three
more bottles should be prepared than it is expected will be used as some
of the bottles are liable to be broken while cooling or heating. The
bottles should be filled about two-thirds full. This leaves room enough
to add the mother starter and later to break up the starter to examine
it. It is desirable not to have the milk or starter touch the cover
since contaminations are more likely. It is a good plan when
pasteurizing to have one bottle as a check. This may be filled with
water and left open and the thermometer placed in it. A uniform
temperature may be obtained by shaking the bottles.

+64. Adding cultures.+--After being pasteurized, the milk should be
cooled to a temperature of 80° F. This is a suitable temperature for the
development of the lactic acid-forming organisms. The commercial or pure
culture should now be added to the milk at the rate specified in the
directions. Care should be exercised in opening bottles not to put the
covers in an unclean place. A sterile dipper is a good place to put
them. After the culture has been added to the milk, it should be mixed
thoroughly by shaking the bottle. This should be repeated every fifteen
or twenty minutes for four or five times. This is done to make certain
that the culture is thoroughly mixed with the milk. The milk should be
placed in a room or incubator as near 80° F. as possible, in order to
have a uniform temperature for the growth of the organisms. The bacteria
in the pure culture are more or less dormant so that a somewhat higher
temperature than the ordinary is necessary to stimulate their activity.
This milk should be coagulated in eighteen to twenty-four hours,
depending largely on the uniformity of the temperature during
incubation.

+65. Cleanliness.+--To produce a good starter, great care should be
exercised that all utensils coming in contact with the milk are sterile.
After the milk is in the container in which the starter is made, it
should be kept covered as continuously as possible. Thermometers should
not be put into it to ascertain the temperature. When examining the
starter, do not dip into it, but pour out, as this prevents
contamination. The cover, when removed from the container, should be put
in a sterile place in such way that the dirt will not stick to it and
later get into the starter.

+66. "Mother" starter or startoline.+--The thickened sour milk obtained
by inoculating the sweet pasteurized milk with pure culture of lactic
acid-forming bacteria is known as "mother starter" or "startoline."

+67. Examining starter.+--This starter should be examined carefully as
to physical properties, odor and taste. The coagulation should be
smooth, free from whey and gassy pockets or bubbles. Sometimes the first
few inoculations from a new culture will show signs of gas, but,
usually, this will quickly disappear, and not injure the starter. It
should have a clean sour cream odor and clean, mild, acid flavor. After
breaking up it should be thick and creamy, entirely free from lumps.
This starter may have an objectionable flavor, due to the media in which
the organisms were growing when shipped. In such cases it is necessary
to carry the starter one or two propagations to overcome the flavor, to
enliven the micro-organisms and to secure the quantity desired.

+68. Second day's propagation.+--For the second day, the milk for the
starter is selected as on the first day. It is pasteurized, and this
time cooled to 70° F. The milk is cooled a trifle colder the second day
than the first, because the organisms have become more active and hence
do not require as high a temperature to grow. Instead of inoculating
with powder, as was done the first day, the mother starter prepared the
first day is used. This requires only a very small amount, perhaps a
tablespoonful to a quart bottle. It should be thoroughly mixed with the
milk. This starter may have the flavor of the media used in the
laboratory culture, therefore may need to be carried one or two days
more to eliminate it. After the flavor has become normal, the mother
starter is ready for commercial use.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--An improved starter-can.]

+69. Preparation of larger amount of starter.+--The first thing to
determine is the quantity of starter required. As much milk should be
carefully chosen as the amount of starter desired. This milk should then
be pasteurized. An improved starter-can (Fig. 6) may be used in the
pasteurization of the milk and the making of starter, or a milk-can
(Fig. 7) placed in a tub of water in which there is a steam pipe. The
former requires mechanical power to operate the agitator, but the latter
can be used where mechanical power is not available. In the latter the
milk and starter are stirred by hand. This is the kind of apparatus more
often found in cheese factories.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--A simple device for the preparation of starter.]

If possible, this milk should be pasteurized to 180° F. for thirty
minutes; this kills most of the bacteria and spores. The milk should be
cooled to 60°-65° F., the temperature of incubation. This temperature
may be varied with conditions, so that the starter will be ready for use
at the desired time. The higher the temperature, the less time is
required to ripen the starter.

+70. Amount of mother starter to use.+--The mother starter prepared the
day before is now used to inoculate the starter milk. The amount to use
will depend on:

1. Temperature of milk when mother starter is added;

2. Average temperature at which the milk will be kept during the
ripening period;

3. Time allowed for starter to ripen before it is to be used;

4. Vigor and acidity of the mother starter added. There is a very wide
range as to the amount of mother starter required, from 0.5 of one per
cent to 10 per cent being used under different conditions.

Some operators prefer to add the mother starter while the milk is at a
temperature of about 90° F., before it has been cooled to the incubating
temperature. This reduces the amount of mother starter necessary.

If an even incubating temperature can be maintained, it will require
less mother starter than if the temperature goes down.

If the ripening period is short, it will require a larger amount of
mother starter, than if the ripening period is longer. If the starter
has a low acidity or weak body indicating that organisms are of low
vitality, it will require more mother starter.

+71. Qualities.+--The starter, when ready to use, may or may not be
coagulated; a good idea of the quality of the starter may be gained by
the condition of the coagulation. The coagulation should be jelly- or
custard-like, close and smooth, entirely free from gas pockets and
should not be wheyed off.

When broken up, the starter should be of a smooth creamy texture and
entirely free from lumpiness or wateriness. It should have a slightly
pronounced acid aroma. The starter should be free from taints and all
undesirable flavors; the flavor should be a clean, mild acid taste.

+72. How to carry the mother starter.+--Some mother starter must be
carried from day to day to inoculate the large starter. This may be
carried or made in several ways:

1. Independently: By this method a mother starter is made and carried
entirely separately from the large starter. It requires more time and
work, but is by far the best method. With a good mother starter, there
is not so much danger of the larger starter becoming poor in quality.

2. Mother starter may be made by dipping pasteurized milk from that
prepared for the large starter with sterile jars and then inoculating
these jars separately. By this method, if the milk selected for the
large starter is poor, the mother starter for the next day will be the
same. It is very difficult by this method to carry a uniform, high
quality mother starter.

There is danger that the container used for the mother starter may not
be sterile, and there is also danger of contamination in transferring
the milk.

3. Another practice is to hold over some of the large starter used
to-day for mother starter. This is by far the easiest method. By this
practice, there is no certainty of the quality of the starter, because
there is little or no control of the mother starter. If the large
starter is for some reason not good, there is no separate reserve of
mother starter on which to rely.

+73. Starter score-cards.+--The use of a score-card tends to analyze the
observations in such a way as to emphasize all the characteristics
desired in the starter. Such an analysis seeks to minimize the personal
factor and produce a standardization of the quality. The score-card
finally reduces the qualities of the starter to a numerical basis for
ease of comparison. Many score-cards have been proposed but the one
preferred by the authors is that used by the Dairy Department of the New
York State College of Agriculture, which is as follows:


           CORNELL SCORE-CARD

  Flavor     50 Clean, desirable acid.

  Aroma      20 Clean, agreeable acid. No undesirable aroma.

  Acidity    20 0.6 per cent-0.8 per cent.

  Body       10 Before breaking up: jelly-like, close,
                  absence of gas holes. No free
                  whey. After breaking up:
                  smooth, creamy, free from granules
                  or flakes.

The qualities mentioned in this score-card can be quickly and easily
determined by examining and tasting the starter and by making an acid
test of a sample. The acid test is conducted as with milk (see Chapter
II) except the starter must be rinsed out of the pipette with pure
water. Some starter score-cards call for a bacterial examination and
counting of the starter organisms. This takes a considerable period of
time and is not entirely necessary. The physical properties and acid
test are closely correlated with the presence of the desired organisms.

+74. Use of starter.+--If all milk could be clean and sweet and the only
fermentation from it were the clean acid type, a starter would be
useless. Such milk is hard to obtain; therefore, a starter is used to
overcome the bad fermentation. This improves the flavor, body and
texture of the cheese. The common contaminations which the starter will
tend to correct are:

  1. Gas-producing bacteria.
  2. Yeasts.
  3. Bad flavors or taints.

The length of time a starter may be carried depends on the accuracy and
carefulness of the maker. This calls for scrupulous attention to the
temperature, the selection of milk and keeping out contaminations. The
maker must remember that a starter is not merely milk, but milk full of
a multitude of tiny plants, very sensitive to food, temperature, clean
surroundings and the quantity of their own acid.


     NEW YORK STATE COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AT CORNELL UNIVERSITY

       +STARTER LOT-CARD+            +Department of Dairy Industry.+
  ==================================================================
                        Day and Date_____________________

  +MILK:+

  Kind________________ % fat_____% solids not fat_____

  Flavor__________________________________

  Amount of milk____________   Hours old______________

  +PASTEURIZATION:+

  Method______________________________________________

  Milk when received: Temperature_____ °

        Acidity_____ %

  Heating: Turning on heat__________ APM.

        Desired temp. reached__________ APM.

        Turning off heat__________ APM.

        Length of time at desired temp.__________

        Beginning to cool__________

        Cooled__________ APM; to__________ °

  Acidity: After pasteurization__________

        When inoculated________________

  +INOCULATION:+

        Time__________ Temperature__________

        Amount__________ lbs.   __________%

  +INCUBATION:+

  Temperature__________   Time__________

  +MOTHER STARTER USED:+

  Source_____________________________________  % used_______________

  Times propagated___________________________  Acidity______________

  Amount used________________________________  Appearance___________

              Flavor_______________________________

  Comments__________________________________________________________

  +STARTER:+

  Time of examining__________

  Temperature________________

                          +SCORE-CARD:+

  Flavor__________50|    Clean, desirable acid.
                    |
  Aroma___________20|    Clean, agreeable acid. No undesirable aroma.
                    |
  Acidity_________20|    0.6%-0.75%.
                    |
  Body____________10|    Before breaking up: jelly-like, close,
                    |      absence of gas holes. No free whey.
                ____| ___After breaking up: smooth, creamy, free from
                    |      granules or flakes.
  Total_________ 100|
  -----------------------------------
  The above is a tentative score-card.

  +COMMENTS:+____________________________________________________
  _______________________________________________________________
  _______________________________________________________________
  _______________________________________________________________

  +Work and observation by+______________________________________


+75. The amount of starter to use+ depends on the amount of acid desired
in the milk for any particular kind of cheese. The great abuse of
starter is the practice of using too much. It is better and safer to add
starter a little at a time and several times than to add too much at
once. When starter is added to milk for cheese-making, it should be
strained to remove any lumps; otherwise an uneven color is likely to
result.

+76. Starter lot-card.+--For certain dairy operations, a permanent
record is desired. This is especially true in the making of starter and
certain varieties of cheese. A lot-card not only serves as a record but
also points out the succeeding steps of the operation. This latter is
especially useful for beginners and students. Page 53 shows a desirable
lot-card to be used when making starter. Each operation has been
referred to the page in the text where it is discussed. This makes this
particular lot-card an index to the whole process of starter-making as
here treated.




CHAPTER V

_CURD-MAKING_


Aside from the purely sour-milk cheeses, the coagulum or curd resulting
from rennet action is the basis of cheese-making. The finished cheese,
whatever its final condition, is primarily dependent on a particular
chemical composition and fairly definite physical characters in the
freshly made curd mass. These characters are determined by a series of
factors under control of the cheese-maker. Assuming the milk to be
normal in character, success depends on the use of a proper combination
of these factors. The possible variations in each factor together with
their number makes an almost infinite series of such combinations
possible. The essential steps in the process are, therefore, presented
as underlying all cheese-making. The special adaptations of each factor
are considered in the discussion of the varieties group by group.

These factors follow:

  _A._ The coagulation group:

  1. Fat-content of the milk.
  2. The acidity of the milk.
  3. The temperature of renneting.
  4. The effective quantity of rennet.
  5. Curdling period or the time allowed for rennet action.

  _B._ The handling group:

  6. Cutting or breaking the curd.
  7. Heating (cooking) or not heating.
  8. Draining (including pressing, grinding and putting into hoops
  or forms).

+77. The composition of the milk.+--The fat percentage in the milk in
the cheese-vat should be known to the cheese-maker and be strictly under
his control. The fat tester and the separator make this clearly
possible. He can go further. Milk from particular herds whose quality is
a matter of record from the routine test of each patron's milk may be
selected and brought together for the manufacturer of cheese of special
quality. Control of casein or lactose, on the contrary, is not nearly so
practicable. The purchase of milk on the fat test has become so well
established in most dairy territories, as to insure the presence and
constant use of the tester. A fat test of the mixed product in the
cheese-vat in connection with established tables thus insures an
accurate knowledge of the materials which go into each day's cheese. For
some varieties of cheese, whole milk should always be used. For other
varieties, the addition or removal of fat is regularly recognized as
part of the making process. The presence of added fat or the removal of
fat affects the texture of the product and the details of the process of
making.

+78. Cheese color.+--An alkaline solution of annatto is usually used as
a cheese color. This colors both casein and fat in contrast to butter
color which is an oil solution of the dye and mixes only with the fat.
Cheese color is added to the milk in making some varieties of cheese,
and not for others. When lactic starter is used, the color should be
added after the starter and just before the addition of the rennet. The
amount is determined by the color desired in the cheese. The usual
amount varies from one to four ounces to each thousand pounds of milk.
Before adding, the color should be diluted in either milk or water,
preferably water. It should then be mixed thoroughly with the milk.

+79. The acidity factor.+--Milk as drawn shows a measurable acidity when
titrated to phenolphthalein with normal sodium hydroxide. This figure
varies with the composition of milk. Casein itself gives a weakly acid
reaction with this indicator. Calculated as lactic acid, this initial
acidity varies within fairly wide limits, records being found from 0.12
to 0.21 of one per cent or even more widely apart. Commonly, however,
such titration shows 0.14 to 0.17 per cent. Some forms of cheese
(Limburger, Swiss, Brie) are made from absolutely fresh milk. Acidity
from bacterial activity is important as a factor in the making of most
types of cheese and probably in the ripening of all types.

Increasing the acidity of the milk hastens rennet action and within
limits produces increased firmness of the curd. If carried too high,
acidity causes a grainy or sandy curd. Normally fresh milk is
sufficiently acid in reaction when tested to phenolphthalein to permit
rennet to act, but the rate of action increases rapidly with the
development of acid. Increase of acidity may be accomplished: (_a_) by
the addition of acid as has been done by Sammis[25] and Bruhn in
pasteurized milk for Cheddar cheese; or (_b_) by the development of acid
through the activity of lactic organisms, which is the usual way. For
renneting, the acidity necessary for particular cheeses runs from that
of absolutely fresh milk still warm (as in French Brie, Limburger,
Swiss, Gorgonzola) through series calling for increase of acidity,
hundredth by hundredth per cent calculated as lactic acid. This ranges
from 0.17 to 0.20 per cent as is variously used in American factory
Cheddar to about 0.25 to 0.28 per cent as obtained by adding acid in
Sammis' method. This method is discussed under the heading "Cheddar
Cheese from Pasteurized Milk" (p. 229) since it requires special
apparatus and has not thus far been used with other types of cheese. For
the development of acidity by the action of bacteria, lactic starter is
almost universally used. This may be added in very small quantities and
the acidity secured by closely watching its development or by adding
starter in amount sufficient to obtain the required acidity at once. In
either case, the cheese-maker needs to know the rate of action of the
culture to insure the proper control of the process. The amount of acid
already present when the rennet is added affects not only the texture of
the curd as first found, but within limits indicates also the rate at
which further acidity may be expected to develop.

A series of experiments in making Roquefort were tabulated to show the
rate of acidification from various initial points. In the graphs (Fig.
8) the curves for acid development are parallel after the determination
reaches 0.30 per cent. These experiments were made at a temperature 80°
to 84° F. Milk at the lowest acidities tried developed titratable acid
very slowly. A period of several hours was required to produce
sufficient acid to affect the curd texture. When the acid reached 0.25
per cent by titration, the further rise was rapid and all the lines
became almost straight and parallel after the titration reached 0.30
per cent. If this rapid souring occurred after the completion of the
cheese-making process, the texture of the experimental cheese was not
measurably affected. In those cases, however, in which 0.30 per cent was
reached before the cheese reached its final form in the hoop, the
texture of the ripened cheese was entirely different from that desired
for this variety under experiment. These curves apply directly to but
one cheese process in which a particular combination of acidity, rennet
and time is used to obtain a very delicately balanced result. In other
varieties it is equally important to obtain exactly the adjustment of
these factors which will bring the desired result.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--The acidification of Roquefort cheese.]

+80. Acidity of milk when received.+--If proper care has been taken,
milk should be delivered to the factory fresh, clean and without the
development of acid. If the milk has not been handled properly, the
early stages of souring or some other unfavorable fermentation will have
developed. Such milk may develop too much acid, or gas, or any one of
several objectionable flavors during the making and ripening of the
cheese. Some cheese-makers become very expert in detecting the first
traces of objectionable qualities, but most makers are dependent on
standardized tests to determine whether milk shall be accepted or
rejected, and when accepted to determine the rate at which it may be
expected to respond during the cheese-making process.

Various tests have been devised to determine the amount of acid present
in milk. There are two tests commonly used in cheese-factories. One is
known as the "acid test" and the other the "rennet test."

+81. The acid test+[26] is made by titrating a known amount of milk
(Fig. 9) against an alkali solution of known strength, using
phenolphthalein as an indicator. The object of the indicator is to tell
the condition of the milk, whether it is acid, alkaline or neutral. The
indicator does not change in an acid solution but turns pink when the
solution is or becomes alkaline. To make the test, a known quantity of
the material to be tested is placed in a white cup, and to this several
drops of indicator are added. As an indicator, a 1 per cent solution of
phenolphthalein in 95 per cent alcohol is commonly used. As an alkali
solution, sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is used in the standardized strength
usually either tenth (N/10) normal or twentieth (N/20) normal. This
solution should be obtained in some one of the standardized forms
commercially prepared. The alkali is added, drop by drop, from a
graduated burette until a faint pink color appears. This shows that the
acid in the milk has been neutralized by the alkali. The amount of
alkali that has been used can be determined from the burette. Knowing
the amount of milk and alkali solution used, it is easy to calculate the
amount of acid in the substance tested. The results are usually
expressed either as percentages of lactic acid or preferably as cubic
centimeters of normal alkali required to neutralize 100 or 1000 c.c. of
milk. This kind of test is on the market under different names, such as
Mann's, Publow's, Farrington's and Marschall's.

[Illustration: _FIG. 9._--An acid tester.]

+82. Rennet tests.+--Several rennet tests have been devised, but the one
most widely used is the Marschall (Fig. 10). This consists of a 1 c.c.
pipette to measure the rennet extract, a small bottle in which to dilute
the extract, a special cup to hold the milk and a spatula to mix the
milk with the rennet extract. This cup has on the inside from top to
bottom a scale graduated from 0 at the top to 10 at the bottom. There is
a hole in the bottom to allow the milk to run out.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Marschall rennet test.]

+83. Marschall rennet test.+--To make a Marschall rennet test, 1 c.c. of
rennet extract is measured, with the 1 c.c. pipette, and placed in the
bottle. Care should be exercised to rinse out the pipette. The bottle is
then filled to the mark with cold water. After the milk has been heated
to the setting temperature, 84°-86° F., the cup is filled with milk and
set on the edge of the vat so that the milk running out through the hole
in the bottom of the cup will flow into the vat. Just as the surface of
the milk reaches the 0 mark on the cup, the diluted rennet extract is
added and thoroughly mixed with the milk, using the small spatula to
stir it. The rennet and milk should be mixed until it has run down at
least one-half space on the scale in the cup. As the rennet begins to
coagulate the milk, it runs slower from the hole in the bottom of the
cup, until it finally stops. When it stops, the point on the scale
indicated by the surface of the coagulated milk is noted. The test is
recorded by the number of spaces the surface of the milk lowers from the
time the rennet is added until it is coagulated. This test depends on
three factors: the strength of the rennet extract, the temperature of
the milk, the acidity of the milk. The more acid, the quicker the milk
will coagulate. To measure any one of these factors, the other two must
be constant. The variable factor is the acidity of the milk. This test
will not indicate the percentage of acid in the milk, but is simply a
comparative test to be used from day to day; for example, if the rennet
test to-day shows three spaces, and the operator makes that milk into
cheese and the process seems to be normal, it shows that for good
results in this factory, milk should be ripened to show three spaces
every day. If the next day the milk showed four spaces, it should be
allowed to ripen more until it shows three spaces. If it shows only two
spaces, this indicates that the milk has too much acid development or is
over-ripe. A cheese-maker will have to determine at what point to set
his milk, because the test will vary from one factory to another.

+84. Comparison of acid and rennet test.+--Each of these tests has its
advantages and disadvantages. The advantage of the acid test is that it
can be made as well of warm as cold milk. This is of great importance in
determining whether the milk delivered by any patron is too ripe to be
received. The acidity of other materials, such as whey and starter, can
be determined as well as that of milk. The disadvantages are that it is
difficult to get the alkali solution of the proper strength and the
solution is liable to deteriorate on standing. It requires a careful
exact operator to make the test.

The advantages of the rennet test are that it is easy to make, and it
requires no materials that are hard to replace. The disadvantage is that
the milk must be warmed to the same temperature before a comparative
test can be made. The size of the outlet in cups varies. It does not
indicate the percentage of acid present in the milk. It is simply a
comparative test. To obtain the best result, both tests should be used
in conjunction.

+85. Control of acid.+--The control of acidity in curd and cheese is
dependent on the control of the moisture or water-content. The control
of both factors is very important in relation to the quality[27] of the
cheese. Often acidity is spoken of when moisture is really intended, and
vice versa. The close relation between the moisture and acidity is due
to the presence of the milk-sugar in solution in the milk-serum which
becomes the whey of cheese-making. Water or moisture in cheese consists
of the remnant of this whey which is not expelled in the making process.
During manufacture and the ripening process, the milk-sugar is changed
to lactic acid. A cheese may be sweet when first made and after a time
become sour because it contains too much moisture in the form of whey.
Excess of whey carries excess of milk-sugar from which fermentation
produces intense acidity.

Various tests have been devised to determine the amount of acid
developed at the different stages of manufacture. These tests are
described on page 61. By the use of such tests, the development of acid
during the manufacturing process can be very accurately determined.
There is no quick, accurate test to determine the amount of moisture in
the curd. The cheese-maker has to rely on his own judgment, guided
largely by the appearance, feeling and condition of the curd.

After the rennet extract has been added, all control of the acid
development is lost. The cheese-maker can determine rather accurately
how fast the acid will develop during the ripening of the milk. This
shows the importance of the proper ripening. The amount of acid
developed during the different stages of the manufacturing process can
be approximately followed with the various acid tests. The manufacturing
process should then be varied to obtain the proper relation between the
moisture and the acid present. The only time that the acidity may be
controlled is when the milk is being ripened. If too much acid is
developed before the rennet is added, there is apt to be too much acid
at each stage of the manufacturing process. This is liable to hurry the
cheese-making process and to cause a loss, both in quality and quantity
of cheese, and may cause a high acid or sour cheese. If sufficient acid
is not developed at the time the rennet is added or if the milk is not
sufficiently ripened, the acid is liable not to develop fast enough so
that there will not be sufficient at each step in the cheese-making
process. Such a cheese is called "sweet." There are several conditions
which will cause an over-development of acid. Such a cheese is called
"acidy" or "sour." These factors are within the control of the
cheese-maker, hence should be avoided. A sour cheese shows lack of skill
and care on the part of the cheese-maker.

_Conditions causing an acidy or sour cheese:_

  Receiving sour or high acid milk at the cheese-factory.
  Use of too much starter.
  Ripening the milk too much before the rennet is added.
  Removing the whey before the curd is properly firmed, hence leaving
    it with too much moisture.
  Development of too much acid in the whey before the whey is removed.
  Improper relationship between the moisture and acidity at the time
    of removing the whey.

_Conditions causing deficient acid:_

  Adding the rennet before sufficient acid has developed.
  Not using sufficient starter.
  Not developing sufficient acid in the whey.

+86. Acidity and rennet action.+--The rennet extract acts only in an
acid medium. The greater the acid development, within certain limits,
the faster the action of the rennet. If enough acid has developed to
cause a coagulation of the casein, the rennet will not coagulate the
milk. This is one reason why Cheddar cheese cannot be made from sour
milk.

+87. Acidity and expulsion of the whey.+--The contraction of the curd
and expulsion of the whey are so closely related that they may be
treated under the same heading. The more acid, the faster the whey
separates from the curd, other conditions being uniform. The relation of
acidity and firmness of the curd to temperature of the curd is another
important factor in the successful manufacture of cheese. The higher the
acidity, the faster the temperature of the curd can be raised without
any harmful effects. If the temperature is raised too fast in relation
to the acidity, the film surrounding each piece of curd will become
toughened so that the moisture will not be able to escape. When this
condition exists, the curd will feel firm but when the pieces are
broken open the inside is found to be very soft. This results in a large
loss later or may cause a sour cheese. It usually causes an uneven
texture and color in the cheese.

+88. Acidity in relation to cheese flavor.+--Just what part the acid
plays in the development of cheese flavor is not known. If a certain
amount of acid is not present, the characteristic cheese flavor does not
develop. If too much acid is developed, it gives the cheese a sour
flavor which is unpleasant. If sufficient acid is not developed, the
other undesirable factors seem to be more active, causing very
disagreeable flavor and may cause the cheese to putrefy. A cheese with a
low acid usually develops a very mild flavor, and if carried to
extremes, as in the case of some washed curd cheese, the true cheese
flavor never develops.

+89. Acidity in relation to body and texture of cheese.+--If a cheese is
to have a close, smooth, mellow, silky body and texture, a certain
amount of acid development is necessary. If too much acid is developed,
the body and texture will be dry, harsh, sandy, mealy, corky. If the
acid is not sufficient the cheese may be soft or weak bodied, and is
usually characterized by "Swiss curd holes," which are spaces of various
sizes usually more or less round and very shiny on the inside.

+90. Acidity in relation to cheese color.+--An over-development of
acidity affects the color of a cheese. If this development of acidity is
uniform throughout the cheese, it causes the color to become pale or
bleached. If this development is uneven, due to the uneven distribution
of moisture, the color will be bleached in spots, causing a mottled
effect.

+91. Control of moisture.+[28]--The cheese-maker must use skill and
judgment in regulating the amount of moisture in relation to the
firmness of the curd and the acid. Since there are no quick accurate
tests to determine the amount of moisture, this is left entirely to the
judgment of the operator. Certain methods of handling the curd reduce
the moisture-content, while others increase it. The cheese-maker must
decide how to handle the curd. If the curd becomes too dry, methods
should be employed to increase the moisture, and vice versa.

_Causes of excessive moisture:_

  Cutting the curd coarse.
  Cutting the curd after it has become too hard.
  Setting the milk at a high temperature.
  Use of excessive amount of rennet extract.
  Low acid in the curd at the time of removing the whey.
  Not stirring the curd with the hands as the last of the whey is
    removed.
  High piling of the curd during the cheddaring process.
  Piling the curd too quickly after removing the whey.
  Use of a small amount of salt.
  Holding the curd at too low a temperature after the whey is removed.
  Soaking the curd in water previous to salting.
  Allowing the curd to remain in the whey too long so that it reabsorbs
    the whey.
  Heating the curd too rapidly.

_Causes of insufficient moisture:_

  Cutting the curd too fine or breaking up the pieces with the rake into
    too small pieces.
  Cutting the curd too soft.
  Stirring the curd too much by hand as the last of the whey is being
    removed.
  Developing high acid in the curd at the time of removing the whey.
  Insufficient piling of the curd during the cheddaring process.
  Using a large amount of salt.
  High temperature and low humidity in the curing room.

+92. Relation of moisture to manufacture and quality.+--(1) _Flavor:_ If
the cheese contains too much moisture, it is likely to develop a sour or
acidy flavor. A cheese with a normally high moisture-content usually
ripens or develops a cheese flavor much faster than one with a lower
moisture-content, other conditions being uniform. A cheese with a high
moisture-content is much more liable, during the curing process, to
develop undesirable flavors than is one with a lower moisture-content.
(2) _Body and texture:_ A cheese containing too much moisture is very
soft and is difficult to hold in shape. Such a product breaks down very
rapidly and is usually pasty and sticky in texture. If too little
moisture is present, the cheese is very dry and hard, and cures or
ripens very slowly because of the lack of moisture together with
milk-sugar from which acid may be formed. Dry cheeses are usually harsh,
tough and rubbery in texture. Such cheeses also have poor rinds. (3)
_Color:_ If the ideal conditions exist, the moisture will be evenly
distributed throughout the cheese. The spots containing more moisture
will be lighter in color. If a cheese contains so much moisture that it
becomes "acidy," the effect is the same as when too much acid is
developed, that is, the color becomes pale from the action of the acid.
(4) _Finish:_ A cheese containing too much moisture is usually soft. A
good rind does not form. Such a cheese loses its shape very easily,
especially in a warm curing room. (5) _Quality:_ A cheese with a high
moisture-content is usually marketable for only a very short period.
Such a product usually develops flavor very quickly in comparison to a
dry cheese. It must be sold very soon because if held too long, the
flavor becomes so strong as to be undesirable, and objectionable flavors
are liable to develop. In some cases, such cheeses rot.

+93. Relation of moisture to acidity.+--From the preceding discussion,
it is evident that the relation between the moisture and acidity is very
close, in fact so intimate that in some cases it is difficult to
distinguish one from the other when the quality of the cheese is
considered. The proper relation of the moisture and the acidity
determines the quality of the resulting cheese. If too much acid is
developed during the manufacturing process, the product will be sour. If
too much moisture is retained in the form of whey, the cheese will be
sour. The less acid in the curd, the more moisture in the form of whey
may be retained in the curd without causing a sour cheese. The proper
relationship between the moisture and the acidity must be maintained or
a sour cheese will result.

The relation of the moisture to the acidity also has an influence on the
curing. If the cheese has a low development of acidity and a low
moisture-content, it will cure very slowly. The increasing of either the
acidity or moisture usually increases the rate of cheese ripening, other
factors being the same.

The relation of the acidity and the moisture is so important that it
cannot be neglected without injuring both the quality and quantity of
cheese. This knowledge can be obtained only by experience.

+94. Setting temperature.+--The temperature of renneting makes very much
difference in the texture of the product. The enzyme rennin is sensitive
to very slight changes in temperature. Below 70° F., its rate of action
is very slow. Beginning with approximately 20 per cent of its maximum
effectiveness at 70° F. (the curdling point for Neufchâtel), it has
risen to 65 per cent at 84° F., to 70 per cent at 86° F., as used in
Cheddar, to about 80 to 85 per cent at 90-94° F., as used in Limburger.
At 105° F. it reaches its maximum effective working rate to fall from
that efficiency to about 50 per cent at 120° F. Curdling at low
temperature lengthens the time required for the same amount of rennet to
curdle a given quantity of the same milk. The texture of curd produced
at temperatures between 70° F. and 84° F. is soft, jelly-like, friable
rather than rubbery. At 86° F. it begins to show toughening or rubbery
characters which become very marked at 90° F. to 94° F. as used in
Limburger. With the increased vigor of action as it passes its maximum
rate of action at 105° F., the texture tends to become loose, floccose
to granular. Aside from the Neufchâtel group, the working range of
temperatures for the renneting period runs from about 84° F. to about
94° F., a range of barely 10° F., or the use of 65 per cent to 80 or
possibly 85 per cent of the maximum efficiency of the rennet. Within
this range of temperature, the curd has the physical characters demanded
for making most varieties of cheese.

+95. Strength of coagulating materials.+--Rennet and pepsin preparations
vary in strength and in keeping quality. With a particular stock,
changes go on to such a degree that the last samples from a barrel of
rennet are much weaker than the earlier ones. Each sample, barrel, keg
or bottle should be tested before used. In continuous work the results
of each day's work furnish the guide for the next day's use of a
particular lot of rennet.

+96. Amount of coagulating materials to use.+--For most varieties of
cheese, sufficient rennet extract or pepsin is added to the milk to give
a firm curd in twenty-five to forty minutes. Of the ordinary commercial
rennet extract, this requires from two and one-half to four ounces to
one thousand pounds of milk. This gives a maximum of one part rennet for
each four to six thousand parts of milk. The great strength of the
rennet extract is thus clearly shown.

+97. Method of adding rennet.+--Before rennet is added to the milk, it
is diluted in about forty times its volume of cold water, which chills
the enzyme and retards its action until it can be thoroughly mixed with
the milk. If the material is added without such dilution, the
concentrated extract produces instant coagulation in the drops with
which it comes in contact, forming solid masses from which the enzyme
escapes only slowly to diffuse throughout the mass. Uniform coagulation
thus becomes impossible. After the rennet extract has been diluted with
cold water, it should be distributed the entire length of the vat in an
even stream from a pail. It should then be mixed with the milk by
stirring from top to bottom for about three to four minutes. For this
purpose, either a long-handled dipper or a wooden rake may be used. A
dipperful should be drawn from the gate and stirred into the vat,
otherwise the milk in the gate will fail to coagulate properly because
the rennet diffuses too slowly to reach and affect all the milk at that
point. The milk should be stirred on the top, preferably with the bottom
of a dipper, until signs of coagulation begin to appear. This stirring
keeps the cream from rising. There are various ways or signs to indicate
when the coagulation has gone to the stage at which the mix is about to
become thick: (1) The milk becomes lazy or thicker as the finger is
passed through it; (2) bubbles caused by moving the finger remain on the
milk longer, usually until one can count ten when ready to thicken.

If the milk is stirred too long or after it begins to thicken, the
result is a granular sort of curd, and there will be an abnormally large
loss of fat in the manufacturing process. The addition of the rennet and
subsequent stirring require the exercise of great care and constant
attention to details. The cheese-maker can do nothing else for those few
minutes. When through stirring, it is a good plan in cold weather to
cover the vat with a cloth as this will keep the surface of the curd
warm. In summer the same cover will keep out the flies.

_Causes of a delayed coagulation:_

  (1) Weak rennet extract or too small an amount.
  (2) Low temperatures due to inaccurate thermometers.
  (3) Pasteurized milk.
  (4) Presence of abnormal bacterial ferments.
  (5) Presence of preservatives.
  (6) Heavily watered milk.
  (7) Use of badly rusted[29] cans.
  (8) Milk containing small amounts of casein or calcium salts.

_Causes of uneven coagulation:_

  (1) Uneven temperature of the mix in the vat, due to lack of
        agitation.
  (2) Uneven distribution of the rennet extract.
  (3) Adding rennet to vat too soon after heating, while the sides and
        bottom are still hot, causes curd to stick to sides and bottom
        of the vat making cutting difficult.
  (4) Sloshing after the milk begins to thicken breaks the curd and
        causes it to whey off.

+98. The curdling period.+--The time allowed for rennet action also
affects the texture of the curd. The enzymes of rennet (rennin and
pepsin) do not cease acting with the thickening of the milk. In many
cheeses, the handling process begins as soon as the curd has become
solid enough to split cleanly before a finger thrust into it. If let
stand further, the same curd mass will continue to harden with the
progressive separation of whey; this shows first as drops ("sweating")
on its surface, which then increase in number and size until they run
together and form a sheet of whey. The limit of such action is difficult
to measure. The solidifying process ceases in a period of hours. The
further action of the enzymes is digestive in character and goes on
slowly. It requires a period of weeks or even months to accomplish
measurable results at the working temperatures in use in the trade.
Other ripening agents with more rapid action intervene to shape the
final result. It follows that the rennet factor in the ripening changes
found at the end of the period is almost negligible for most varieties
of cheese, although it appears to be measurable in some varieties.

+99. Cutting or breaking[30] the curd.+--As soon as curd is formed,
separation of whey begins upon the surface and perhaps around the sides
of the vessel. This is accompanied by shrinkage and hardening of the
mass. If the curd remains unbroken, the separation is extremely slow. In
cheese-making practice, such curd masses may be dipped at once into
hoops as in Camembert, dumped in mass into cloths for drainage as in
Neufchâtel or, as in the larger number of cheeses, cut or broken in some
characteristic manner. After the curd mass is firm, the rate at which
subsequent changes take place depends largely on the size of the
particles into which the curd is cut. The smaller the particles, the
quicker the water is expelled. Consequently the development of the
acidity and other changes take place more slowly. For this reason the
curd should be cut into pieces of uniform size. If the work is not
properly performed, the pieces of curd of various sizes will be at
different stages of development. The fine particles will be firm and
elastic while the larger particles are still soft and full of whey and
may be developing too much acid. The knives should be inserted into the
curd obliquely so that they will cut their way into the curd and not
break it. The horizontal knife is used lengthwise of the vat and cuts
the curd into layers of uniform thickness. The perpendicular knife then
is used lengthwise and crosswise of the vat. It first cuts the curd
into strips and then into cubes. The knives may have wire blades or
steel blades, some operators preferring one and some the other.
Whichever is used, the blades should be close enough together to give
the fineness of curd desired.

After the knife passes through, the cut faces quickly become covered
with a smooth coating, continuous over all exposed areas. This surface
has the appearance of a smooth elastic coating or film. This can be seen
by carefully breaking a piece in the hand. It is this film which holds
the fat within the pieces of curd. If the film is broken, some of the
fat globules are lost because the rennet extract acts only on the casein
and that in turn holds the fat. All the fat globules which come in
contact with the knives as they pass through the curd will be left
between the pieces of curd and will pass off in the whey. If care is
exercised in cutting, the loss of fat will be confined to what may be
called a mechanical loss. This is similar to the loss of the sawdust
when sawing a board. This loss in American Cheddar is about 0.3 per cent
and cannot be avoided. If it is greater than this, it is due to
negligence on the part of the cheese-maker or the poor condition of the
milk. The cutting of the curd into small pieces may be considered a
necessary evil. If the moisture could be expelled from the whole mass
without disturbing it, this fat loss could be prevented. The cutting,
breaking or turning should be done with the greatest care, that the loss
may be as small as possible.

+100. Curd knives.+--For cutting curd, special knives have been devised
(Fig. 11). They consist of series of parallel blades fixed in a frame to
make cuts equidistant. The blades run vertically in one, horizontally
in another. They are spaced according to the demands of the variety of
cheese to be made. Wires stretched in a frame take the place of blades
in some makes of curd knife.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--Blade and wire curd knives: horizontal,
perpendicular, horizontal, perpendicular.]

+101. Heating or "cooking."+--Curdling by rennet has already been shown
to be markedly hastened by moderate heating. After the coagulum or curd
is formed, the making process may be completed without the application
of further heat, as in Neufchâtel, Camembert and related forms (Fig. 12)
and in some practices with Limburger. In other forms and especially in
the hard cheeses in which cutting of curd is a prominent part of the
process, the curd after being cut is reheated or "cooked." The cooking
process hastens the removal of the whey, thus shortening the time
required to reduce the water-content of the mass to the percentage most
favorable for the type of cheese desired. The process also produces
marked changes in the physical character of the curd mass. With the rise
in temperature the casein becomes elastic first, then approaches a
melting condition and assumes a tough, almost rubbery consistency. The
final texture is the result of the combination of the amount of rennet
added, the temperature, the acidity reached during the process, and the
final water-content of the mass.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--The heat relation. See pages 77 and 87.]

+102. Draining+ (including grinding, putting into hoops or forms and
pressing).--The reduction of the water in the curd begins almost as soon
as the curd becomes firm. It is aided by cutting or breaking, by the
retention of the heat applied before renneting and by the secondary
heating or cooking used in making certain groups of cheeses. In many
varieties special apparatus is provided in the form of draining boards,
draining racks or bags to hasten the removal of the whey as fast as it
separates. The draining process continues until the cheese has reached
its final form and weight. The intervening process of matting in the
Cheddar group involves a combination of a souring process with the
removal of whey, during which the cubes of curd become fused into
semi-solid masses. If such masses are formed, they must be ground up
before the cheese can be given its final form in the hoop. The draining
process, therefore, may take any one of many forms varying from the
direct transfer of freshly formed curd into hoops in which the entire
draining process is completed, to an elaborate series of operations
which end in pressing curd drained to approximately its final condition
before it is placed in the hoop.

+103. Application to cheese.+--From the discussion of these factors, it
is evident that the cheeses produced will differ widely with the
differences in manipulation. If one considers essential constituent
substances separately, the water-content of the finished product is
found to vary from 30 per cent in Parmesan to 75 per cent in cottage
cheese. The fat-content runs from a trace in some varieties to 60 per
cent in some cream cheeses. The texture of the casein, which gives
character to the product, varies from the tough or glue-like consistency
of freshly made Swiss to the buttery condition of a cream or Neufchâtel
cheese. Inside such limits the tastes of different peoples have led to
the manufacture of many kinds of cheese. Each of these varieties
represents some particular combination of curd-making factors and
ripening conditions which produces a cheese suited to the taste of the
maker and consumer of that country or community.




CHAPTER VI

_CLASSIFICATION_


The literature of cheese-making contains reference to more than 500
names for varieties of cheese. Many of these can be thrown readily into
great groups or families in which there are variations in unessential
detail without modifying the characteristic texture and flavor of the
product. Many varietal names are attached to the product of single
factories or factory groups. Such varieties frequently differ only
slightly in size or shape, or in stage of drainage or of ripening, from
widely known varieties or other similar local forms. The descriptions
recorded for such varieties commonly emphasize minor differences in
manipulation without showing differences in essential factors. Vessels
of particular size are prescribed to be made of wood, earthenware, or of
a special metal. These details specify the exact size and shape of
hoops, the use of particular styles of cutting or breaking instruments
and of certain stirring tools, the material and construction of mats and
draining racks.

The descriptions themselves are very commonly inadequate. The variable
factors in cheese-making are fat-content of the milk, acidity,
temperature of setting, amount of rennet, time allowed for curdling and
the method of draining the curd. The differences in practice lie, with
few exceptions, in the amount or intensity of particular factors, not
differences in kind or quality of treatment. Such contrasts are
quantitative, not qualitative. A great number of combinations is
possible by small variations of these factors.

Varieties selected as types of groups give marked contrasts in
character, but comparison of large numbers of forms shows that almost
every gradation from group to group can actually be found. Within groups
frequently the same physical results in texture and flavor can be
obtained by combinations or adjustments of factors for the purpose of
offsetting or counteracting the effects of one change in practice by the
manipulation of other factors. In ripening, an equally large range of
practices makes possible the development of very different qualities in
mature cheeses from the same lot.

Only a few of the large number of described varieties have obtained even
national importance; fewer still are known outside the country of
origin. In spite of the success of special products when properly
advertised, the largest place in the market is clearly accorded to the
standard forms which are widely known.

+104. Basis of classification.+--A series of these widely known forms
has been chosen as typical of groups in a system of classification
adapted from the French of Pouriau. No completely satisfactory scheme of
classifying all of these varieties has been devised. The grouping
proposed here is based on the principles of curd-making already
discussed together with consideration of the ripening processes to be
discussed with each group. The factors that actually influence the
quality of the final product are separated as completely as possible
from non-essential operative details.

The common use of the terms "soft" and "hard" cheese is based on the
single arbitrary fact of texture. The term "semi-hard" cheese may be
conveniently applied to a miscellaneous group of unrelated families
which are intermediate in texture between such soft forms as Neufchâtel
or Camembert and really hard cheeses like Cheddar or Parmesan. Although
these terms are not made the main basis of the proposed grouping, their
application to sections is indicated. Classification based on the
essential facts of manufacture is, however, really helpful.


  ANALYTICAL TABULATION OF GROUPS

  Section I. Cheeses with sour milk flavor only (Eaten fresh).
             (Soft cheeses 45 to 75% water)                      PAGE

           1. Curdled by souring, Cottage cheese and its
                allies in America, many related varieties
                in Europe                                          90

           2. Curdled by souring and rennet--the Neufchâtel group  95

              a. Skim--Skim-milk Neufchâtel                       105

              b. Part skim to whole milk--American or
                   Domestic Neufchâtel                            106

              c. With fat added--the cream cheeses of
                   the Neufchâtel group (both American
                   and European)--such as Cream, Gervais,
                   Malakoffs, etc.                                108

  Section II. Cheeses ripened.

  Subsection A. Soft cheeses (40 to 50% water).

                1. Curdled by souring, heated, then ripened.

                     Hand cheese, Pennsylvania pot cheese,
                       Harz, etc.                                 112

                2. Curdling by souring and rennet, ripened

                     Ripened (French) Neufchâtel                  114

                3. Curdled primarily by rennet.

                   a. Ripened by mold--Camembert, Brie
                        and their allies                          117

                   b. Ripened by bacteria.

                        * Made from soft or friable
                            curd--d'Isigny, Liederkranz, etc.     134

                       ** Made from firm or tough
                            curds--Limburger and allies           139

  Subsection B. Semi-hard cheeses, firm, well-drained
    (38 to 45% water)

                  a. Curd not cooked, ripened by molds.
                       * Made from friable curd--Roquefort        150

                      ** Made from firm or tough
                           curd--Gorgonzola, Stilton and
                           such French forms as Gex,
                           Septmoncel                             158

                  b. Curd cooked and ripened by
                       bacteria,--brick, Munster, Port
                       du Salut (Oka)                             164

  Subsection C. Hard cheeses, cooked and pressed (30 to
    40% water).

                  a. Ripened without gas holes.
                     1. Dutch--Edam, Gouda                        173
                     2. Danish.
                     3. The Cheddar group.
                        * English--Cheddar and numerous
                            related forms known principally
                            in Great Britain                      184
                       ** American--the factory Cheddar of
                            United States and Canada              184

                  b. Ripened with the development of
                       gas holes.
                      * Holes large--Swiss-Emmenthal,
                          Gruyère, American Swiss                 276

                     ** Holes small--Parmesan and related
                          varieties                               288

Such a classification brings together series of products in which there
is essential similarity in the final output, however great the
differences in manipulation. It does not consider all varieties and
specialties. Some of these groups are important enough to demand special
mention.

+105. Processed cheeses.+--Cheese of any group may be run through mixing
and molding machines and repackaged in very different form from that
characteristic of the variety. In such treatment, the texture and
appearance may be so changed as to give the effect of a new product.
Substances (such as pimiento) are added to change the flavor. Or the
product may be canned and sterilized with equally great change of
flavor and texture. One thus finds Club made from Cheddar; Pimiento
from Cream, Neufchâtel or Cheddar; similarly olive, nut and other
combinations are made. The possible variations are numerous.

+106. Whey cheeses.+--Several products bearing cheese names are made
from whey. These take the forms of the recovery of the albumin and
casein separately or in a single product, and the recovery of the
milk-sugar either alone or with the albumin. Whey cheeses have been
especially developed by the Scandinavian people, although some of them
have their origin in the south of Europe. Certain of these varieties are
produced on a limited scale in America.

There are a number of forms fairly widely known that are difficult to
place in this scheme of groups. Among these are Caciocavallo, Sap Sago.

+107. Soft and hard cheeses.+--Another commonly used classification
makes two groups: (1) soft cheeses; (2) hard cheeses. In such a
classification the semi-hard group presented here is included with the
soft cheeses. Some cheeses of this group are soft in texture. This is
correlated with high water-content, high fat-content or both together.

+108. Relation of moisture to classes.+--In this classification the
water-content reflected in the texture of the cheese assumes first
place. To carry the analysis somewhat further by showing the correlation
between water-content and certain factors, a tabulation of well-known
varieties of typical groups is presented (Table III). In this table the
series of typical dairy products are first arranged according to
water-content of the final product. Approximate limits of percentages of
milk-fat are also given, because milk-fat frequently affects texture to
a degree almost equal to water. Column 4 gives the period within which
the more quickly perishable cheeses are usable, and the length of the
ripening for the more solid forms. The correlation between
water-content, texture and the time of keeping is clearly shown for most
varieties.

  TABLE III

  CORRELATION WATER- AND FAT-CONTENT WITH RIPENING

  ------------------+--------+--------+-------------+--------------
                    |  PER   |  PER   |             |
       VARITY OF    |  CENT  |  CENT  |   PERIOD    |  RIPENING
                    |  WATER |  FAT   |  REQUIRED   |   AGENT
  ------------------+--------+--------+-------------+--------------
  Cheese: Soft,     |        |        |             |
    Cottage         |    70  | trace  | a few days  | Bacteria
    Skim Neufchâtel |    70  | trace  | a few days  | Bacteria
    Neufchâtel      | 50-60  | 12-28  | a few days  | Bacteria
    Camembert       |    50  | 22-30  | 3-5 weeks   | Molds
    Cream cheese    | 40-50  | 35-45  | a few days  | Primarily
                    |        |        |             |   bacteria
                    |        |        |             |
      Semi-hard:    |        |        |             |
    Limburger       | 40-45  | 24-30  | 3-6 months  | Bacteria
    Roquefort       | 38-40  | 31-34  | 3-6 months  | Mold
    Brick           | 37-42  | 31-35  | 3-6 months  | Bacteria
                    |        |        |             |
      Hard:         |        |        |             |
    Cheddar         | 30-39  | 32-36  | 6-12 months | Bacteria
    Swiss           | 31-34  | 28-31  | 9-18 months | Bacteria
                    |        |        |             |  and yeasts
    Parmesan        | 30-33  |        | 2-3 years   | Bacteria
  ------------------+--------+--------+-------------+--------------

The soft cheeses are quickly perishable products. Bacteria and molds
find favorable conditions for growth in products with 45 to 75 per cent
of water. If such growth is permitted, enzymic activities follow quickly
with resultant changes in appearance, texture, odor and taste.
Refrigeration is necessary to transport such cheeses to the consumer,
if properly ripened. Trade in these forms may continue throughout the
year in cool climates and in places where adequate refrigeration is
available. Practically, however, outside the large cities this trade in
America is at present limited to the cold months; inside the large
cities much reduced quantities of these cheeses continue to be handled
through the year.

In the stricter sense, the soft group of cheeses falls naturally into
two series: (1) the varieties eaten fresh; and (2) the ripened soft
cheeses. Those eaten fresh have a making process which commonly involves
the development of a lactic acid flavor by souring, but no ripening is
contemplated after the product leaves the maker's hands. In the ripened
series, after the making process is completed, the essential flavors and
textures are developed by the activity of micro-organisms during
ripening periods varying in length but fairly well-defined for each
variety.

In contrast to the soft cheeses, the hard kinds are low in
water-content, ripen more slowly and may be kept through much longer
periods. They retain their form through a wider range of climatic
conditions. They develop flavor slowly and correspondingly deteriorate
much more slowly. Such cheeses are in marketable condition over longer
periods. In their manufacture the cooking of the curd takes a prominent
place.

+109. Relation of heat to classes.+--The close relation between the heat
applied and the product sought forms the basis of a striking series of
graphs (Fig. 12, page 78). These show the changes hour by hour in the
heat relation during the making process of a series of widely known
forms, each of which is chosen as typical. In some of these forms, heat
is applied but once to bring the milk to the renneting temperature
typical for the variety. Subsequent manipulations are accompanied by a
steady fall in temperature. In other forms, the curd when solid is
specially heated or "cooked" to bring about the changes characteristic
of the variety. These contrasts are clearly brought out by the graphs
which represent practices well recognized for the varieties. The
detailed process for these groups is considered in succeeding chapters.




CHAPTER VII

CHEESES WITH SOUR-MILK FLAVOR


The cheeses with flavor of sour milk are probably more widely used than
any other group. Historically and to a very large degree at present,
they are farm cheeses.[31] No estimate of volume of such production in
the household has ever been made. The utilization of surplus milk in
this way is of ancient origin.

With the introduction of the factory system of handling milk, the
manufacture of such cheese in the household was largely dropped. The
rise in price of all food substances and increasing appreciation of the
food value of milk products have made the recovery of all surplus milk
in some form very necessary. The manufacture of cottage, Neufchâtel and
cream cheese is one of the best forms of such recovery which may be
adapted to utilize any grade from skimmed-milk to cream. Large
quantities of skimmed-milk have frequently been lost from the total of
human food by the manufacture of casein for industrial uses, and by use
as stock feed.

+110. Skim series.+--The kinds of cheeses eaten fresh have in common a
very soft texture and the flavor of sour milk, principally lactic acid.
The group falls naturally into two sections: (1) the cheeses made from
milk curdled by souring; (2) those for which the milk is curdled by
souring and rennet. In the latter group both agencies are necessary to
the resulting product. The time required to curdle by souring alone is
longer than when rennet is used; this period is usually longer than
necessary for the cream to rise by gravity; hence the cream is either
skimmed off or removed with the separator beforehand. The curd,
therefore, is essentially a skimmed-milk curd. Casein curdled in this
way tends to become granular or "rough," to feel "sandy" when rubbed
between the fingers. Heating is commonly necessary to lower the
water-content of the mass even to 75 per cent. Such curd tends to become
hard or rubbery when heat is applied. In this group, the best known form
is variously called "cottage" cheese, "clabber" cheese, schmierkäse.

+111. Cottage cheese+ is made from skimmed-milk, soured by lactic
bacteria until a curd is formed. This is done preferably at about 20° C.
(70° F.), because at this temperature the purely lactic type of organism
has been found to outgrow competing forms which may be present. Starter
containing the desired culture, if properly used, saves much time in the
curdling period. Such curdling requires at least twelve to twenty-four
hours, frequently much longer unless abundant starter is introduced.

+112. Household practice.+--The details of cottage cheese making in the
home differ widely in separate sections and even in different families
in the same part of the country. The essentials of the practice, common
to all, include: (1) curdling the whole milk by natural souring; (2)
removing the sour cream which is usually used for butter-making; (3)
scalding the curdled skimmed-milk either by slowly heating it in the
original vessel surrounded by hot water or by actually pouring an
approximately equal volume of boiling water into the curdled mass; (4)
bagging and draining the mass until it reaches the desired texture; (5)
the kneading of the mass with the addition of salt and cream. The
resulting product varies greatly in quality. Unfavorable fermentations
frequently affect the flavor.[32] The "scalding" varies from a
temperature of 90° F. almost to boiling with a resultant texture varying
from almost the smooth buttery consistency of Neufchâtel to hard coarse
granular lumps. The best practice, using clean well-cared-for milk and
draining at low temperature, produces a very attractive cheese. Such
cheese is heated to 90° to 100° F. on the maker's judgment, drained
carefully, kneaded well by hand or by machine with the addition of cream
to give it an attractive texture and flavor.

+113. Factory practice.+--When cottage cheese is made in the
factory,[33] separated milk is taken; it should be pasteurized and then
soured by a lactic starter. The souring can be accelerated by the use of
a starter, which may be added at the rate of 0.5 to 5 per cent of the
skimmed-milk used, depending on the amount of starter that can be made.
Generally, the more starter added, the more rapid will be the
coagulation and the better will be the flavor of the cheese. As soon as
the milk has thickened, the curd is ready to be broken up and separated
from the whey. This separation is hastened by the application of heat.
Usually the temperature of the curd is raised slightly before it is
broken up; since this makes the curd firmer, there will be a smaller
loss of curd particles in the whey. The curd may be cut with coarse
Cheddar cheese knives or broken with a rake. The temperature of the curd
should be raised very slowly, at least thirty minutes being taken to
reach the desired final temperature. No set rule can be given as to the
exact temperature to which the curd should be heated. The temperature
should be raised until a point is reached at which the curd, when
pressed between the thumb and the fingers, will stick together and not
go back to the milky state. This temperature is usually from 94° to 100°
F., but the cheese-maker must use his own judgment in this respect. If
the curd is heated too much, it will be hard and dry; on the other hand,
if it is not heated sufficiently, the whey will not separate from the
curd and the latter will be very soft and mushy.

When the curd has been heated sufficiently and has become firmed in the
whey, it should be removed from the whey. This may be done either by
letting down one end of the vat and piling the curd in the upper end, or
by dipping out the curd into a cloth bag and allowing the whey to drain,
which it does very rapidly. No treatment can prevent the "roughness" of
an acid curd (this is a fine gritty feeling when rubbed between the
fingers), but the coarse hard grainy texture and lumps characteristic of
the highly heated curd do not develop. Experimental workers have agreed
that to have the proper texture, such curd should contain when finished
about 70 to 75 per cent of water. It should have a mild but clean acid
flavor. Such a cheese will carry about 1 to 2 per cent of salt, without
an objectionably salty taste. This cheese is commonly sold by measure,
sometimes in molds or cartons. The manufacture of all forms of cottage
cheese has been largely superseded by the making of skimmed-milk
Neufchâtel or Baker's cheese.

The yield from one hundred pounds of skimmed-milk runs up to fourteen to
nineteen pounds of cheese, when made very wet or from pasteurized milk.
The yield varies with the moisture-content of the cheese, being greater
for cheese with a high content. Too much moisture or whey should not be
left in the curd, however, as this will render it too soft to be
handled.

Cottage cheese made by either the home or factory practice is a quickly
perishable article. Although the acid restrains bacteria at first, the
high percentage of water favors the growth of molds which tolerate
acidity, especially _Oidium (Oospora) lactis_ and the Mucors or black
molds. These molds destroy acidity rapidly and thus permit the bacteria
of decay to develop and to produce objectionable taste and odors.
Spoilage in these products is accelerated by the kneading process which
distributes air throughout the mass and with it all forms of microbial
contamination.

+114. Buttermilk cheese.+--A cheese closely resembling cottage may be
made from buttermilk. If the buttermilk came from cream which was
churned before it became sour, the process is the same as that already
described for the making of cottage cheese from skimmed-milk. If the
buttermilk came from sour cream the process of manufacture is much more
difficult. The casein of sour cream has already been coagulated with
acid and broken during churning into very minute rather hard particles.
These fine particles are difficult to recover. They are so fine that
they pass through the draining cloth or at other times clog it and
prevent drainage. They do not stick together at ordinary temperatures.
They cannot be collected by the use of acid because they have already
been coagulated with acid. After casein has been coagulated with acid,
rennet extract will not recoagulate the particles. The buttermilk may be
mixed with sweet skimmed-milk; then as the latter coagulates, it locks
in the casein of the buttermilk so that it can be collected. If
buttermilk from soured cream is used alone, the casein may be
collected[34] by neutralizing and heating to 130 to 150° F., and holding
until the casein gathers together. The whey can then be drawn off. Often
there is further difficulty in getting the casein to collect, since the
pieces remain so small that they go through the strainer.

Cheese made entirely from buttermilk is sandy in texture and often not
palatable. If the buttermilk with good flavor is mixed with
skimmed-milk, it makes a good cheese closely resembling cottage.

+115. Neufchâtel group.+[35]--The Neufchâtel process originated in
northern France where a number of varieties are included under this as a
group name. Among these are Bondon, Malakoff, Petit Suisse, Petit Carré.
The name designates a general process of curd-making which is applied to
skimmed-milk, whole milk or cream. Some of the resultant cheeses are
ripened; some are eaten fresh. The Neufchâtel cheeses of France gained
such wide recognition for quality that the process of making has become
widely known. In America the manipulations of the French process were
early dropped. The essentials were made the basis of a successful
factory practice which has been widely adopted. The American factory
practice is discussed here and the French process briefly considered
under the heading Ripened Neufchâtel. (See Chapter VIII.)

+116. Domestic or American Neufchâtel cheeses+ are soft, have clean sour
milk (lactic acid) flavor and are quickly perishable. In all but the
coldest weather, they require refrigeration to reduce deterioration and
loss. They range in fat-content from traces only to 50 per cent and
more; in water from 40 to 75 per cent, according to the milk used. In
texture Neufchâtel is smooth, free from gas, free from lumps or
roughness when rubbed between the fingers. This flavor and texture is
obtained by a combination of slow rennet curdling with developing
acidity. No further ripening is permitted.

+117. The factory.+--Neufchâtel factories require the standard dairy
equipment for receiving, weighing, testing, separating, heating,
pasteurizing and cooling the milk. Since many factories produce several
products, the same general dairy equipment may serve for all. In
addition to such equipment, Neufchâtel requires a curdling apparatus
which can be held at 70-75° F. This may be a room properly controlled,
or a tank where temperature control is obtained by water and steam. For
draining, a room kept at 60° F. gives nearly the ideal temperature,
which must be supplemented by relative humidity high enough to prevent
the exposed surface of curd from drying during periods of twelve to
twenty-four hours. This requires almost a saturated atmosphere. A room
with special molding machinery is required and tables for wrapping,
labeling and boxing the product are necessary. Box-making machinery is
usually an economic necessity for work on a large scale. Adequate
refrigeration is requisite both to chill the curd before molding and to
preserve it after packaging.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Neufchâtel draining racks.]

+118. Cans.+--For curdling, the "shot-gun" can, about nine inches in
diameter and twenty inches deep, is generally used. This holds thirty to
forty pounds of milk. Increased capacity is dependent, therefore, on the
number of units installed, not on changes in the units themselves.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Detail of a Neufchâtel draining rack.]

+119. Draining racks.+--A draining rack is required for each can of
curd. These racks also are standardized units whose number limits the
capacity of the factory. The design of these racks (Figs. 13, 14) and
their arrangement in the draining room are taken from Bulletin 78 of the
Storrs Agricultural Experiment Station: "The racks are rectangular,
thirteen inches wide, thirty-six inches long and ten inches deep. The
corner posts extend one and one-half inches beyond the strips at top and
bottom with the tops rounded as a rule as seen in the photograph. The
bottom slats fit loosely into notches, hence are removable for washing
purposes. The materials required are four corner posts one and one-half
by one and one-half inches; nine strips one by three-eighths by
thirty-six inches; six strips one by three-eighths by thirteen inches,
two strips one by three-eighths by twelve and a quarter inches, notched
to receive the bottom slats; all made from pine."

+120. Cloths.+--For each draining rack, a cloth one yard wide and one
and one-half yards long is required. Cotton sheeting is satisfactory for
the purpose; "even-count, round-thread, unmercerized voile" is suggested
by Dahlberg.[36]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Neufchâtel and cream cheese molds.]

+121. Molding machinery.+--For work on a large scale, special power
machines[37] are regularly used. These consist of a hopper and worm
delivering a standard size stream of curd through a proper size and
shape of delivery tube. This curd stream is cut by an automatic device
into the proper lengths to form the standard cheese. In this way a
uniform size of cheeses is obtained. Experimental work with hand
apparatus showed that a worm six inches in diameter is required to
deliver curd in a smooth column one and one-half inches square. If the
pressure is not sufficient, the column will frill at the edges. Such
irregular surfaces cannot be wrapped smoothly enough to delay spoilage.

On a small scale, a fair grade of product can be molded through a tin
tube (see Fig. 15) one and three-quarters inches in diameter and ten
inches long in which the curd is compressed by a close fitting plunger
operated by hand.

+122. Milk for Neufchâtel+ should be clean, free from gas and taint.
Such milk should preferably be not more than twelve hours old when
received and in no case show higher than 0.20 per cent lactic acid by
titration. Milk testing 4 per cent fat or higher will produce a higher
quality of product than lower grade milk, although every grade from
skimmed-milk to cream is used in producing some form of Neufchâtel. This
milk should be pasteurized unless shown to be free from tuberculosis by
proper test of the cattle. Evidence[38] that the organism of
tuberculosis will withstand the regular handling process for cheeses of
this group and retain its ability to cause disease in experimental
animals makes the introduction of pasteurization necessary in this whole
group of cheeses. Any effective pasteurization may be used, but
temperatures of 140-145° F. for thirty minutes have been effective with
less changes in the milk than higher temperatures for shorter periods.
The milk should be cooled to curdling temperature and the starter and
rennet added and stirred into the milk in bulk. The milk may then be
quickly distributed into the curdling cans with a hose or from the gate
valve of the mixing vat.

+123. Starter.+--To insure the development of a clean acid flavor, a
small amount of lactic starter should be used. The quantity to use
depends on the quality of the milk. With skimmed-milk, a pint for each
thirty-pound can is recommended by Matheson and Cammack[39] and by
Dahlberg. (See page 98.) For whole-milk Neufchâtel, 2 c.c. to a
thirty-pound can of milk commonly gives good results. On this basis 2
ounces of starter would be sufficient if properly stirred into about
1000 pounds of milk. Too slow development of acid is preferable to
over-rapid souring.

+124. Renneting or setting.+--The milk should be cooled after
pasteurizing to between 70° and 75° F. Rennet is added at the rate of
1/3 c.c. to a thirty-pound can (roughly 1/3 ounce to 1000 pounds). This
will thicken the milk sufficiently in the first few hours to reduce the
separation of the cream. For completion of the curdling and souring
process, twelve to eighteen hours are required. Usually the cans stand
overnight at uniform temperature. When ready to drain, the curd should
be firm, smooth and mildly acid. Whey separating from it should not
titrate above 0.35 per cent titrated as lactic acid.

+125. Draining.+--A cloth is spread over a draining rack and the
contents of one "shot-gun" can poured upon the cloth with as little
breaking as possible. In this way a large surface is exposed. The room
must be kept wet to prevent the surface of the curd drying to form
crusts which stop draining. A temperature of 60° F. is favorable to the
maintenance of proper texture and humidity without the development of
objectionable organisms, especially _Oidium lactis_, which tends to
cover every exposed surface in such rooms. Draining may be hastened by
turning the curd or changing the position of the cloth. In factory
practice, the large draining surface reduces the necessity of handling
the curd and reduces the loss of fat. About twelve hours are required
upon the draining racks.

On a small scale with a few cans of curd in the home, any form of
draining rack may be used, such as a potato or berry crate, or the
corners of the cloth may be brought together, tied and the mass hung up.
The curd must be turned by pulling up the corners of the cloth to
prevent drying at the edges and stoppage of draining from the center of
the mass. Such treatment produces much more rapid drainage than the
factory practice and involves proportionately more labor and larger fat
losses.

+126. Cooling Neufchâtel.+--When whey ceases to separate readily, the
corners of the cloth are loosed from the rack, folded diagonally or
tied, and the curd cooled on ice or in refrigerators. When thoroughly
chilled the bags of curd are put into presses, where light but
increasing pressure forces more whey out of the mass. Tests at this time
should show about 0.60 per cent acid in the whey. With low-fat curd
every step of the process may be hastened, but with high-fat care must
be exercised to prevent loss of fat during pressing especially. Any
pressing device permitting continuous pressure with ease of manipulation
may be used.

+127. Pressing.+--The ideals of the maker must determine the extent of
pressing. A high yield is obtained by leaving whey in the curd. If
immediate consumption is certain, such cheese may be satisfactory, but
if the cheese is to be held some days the extra whey carrying more
milk-sugar favors increased acid development. This produces very sour
cheese with much more danger of other fermentations which cause
objectionable flavor. Too much water favors more active bacterial growth
as well as produces cheese too soft for the necessary handling in the
market.

In the press, several bags of curd may be piled together. The press
should be released and the bags turned from time to time to insure even
drainage. Several hours of pressing are usually required. The danger of
insufficient pressing is due to the difference of texture between the
worked and unworked curd. Before working, curd carrying 10 per cent
excess moisture resembles the finished product sufficiently to deceive
any but the experienced maker. But if this curd is transferred to the
worker and to the molding machine, it is found to become soft, pasty and
sticky, to lack "body," hence to make very unsatisfactory packages and
to spoil very quickly. The masses of curd should come out of the press
as dry and hard flat cakes.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Working Neufchâtel.]

+128. Working and salting Neufchâtel.+--The cakes of curd go from the
press to the working table. Here they are broken by hand or by a
butter-worker or kneading machine (Fig. 16). Salt at the rate of one
and one-half pounds to 100 pounds of curd is added. If the curd is not
sufficiently pressed, the masses become mushy or pasty during the
working process. The working is continued until the whole mass is
uniformly smooth and buttery.

+129. Storage.+--The draining and working processes permit the
contamination of the curd with organisms from the air and from the
apparatus. These are distributed throughout the mass. Air is also worked
thoroughly into the curd. Such a product spoils quickly. Distributing
houses find the Neufchâtel trade uncertain in volume from day to day,
hence many of them store the cheese in bulk and package only fast enough
to fill orders. This minimizes the loss due to spoilage. Such curd may
be packed into tubs and kept for considerable time in cold storage. If
molded for the retail trade, it is more quickly perishable. When packed
solidly in mass, curd is largely protected from spoilage by the
exclusion of air and perhaps the quick exhaustion of free oxygen through
the respiration of the micro-organisms present and by its acidity. This
must be supplemented by low temperature to reduce the loss to a minimum.
Even when spoilage begins, it is easily confined to the slight growth of
_Oidium lactis_ or green mold and bacteria on exposed areas. These can
be removed with minimum loss and damage to the mass. On the other hand,
such curd molded into the commercial package of 3 to 6 ounces and
wrapped in paper, with tin-foil or carton for protection, still presents
enormously increased surface for the growth of aerobic forms--especially
_Oidium lactis_, green mold (Roquefort mold is the usual green species)
and accompanying bacteria. Curd in tubs may be kept some days; in
commercial packages lowering of quality (flavor) begins almost at once.

+130. Molding.+--When the standard molding machine (Fig. 17) is
provided, curd is brought directly from the refrigerator to the machine.
If permitted to become warm, the mass becomes sticky; when cold it is
more readily handled. The machine is fitted with the special delivery
tube for the variety to be handled, cylindrical for Neufchâtel in its
various forms, rectangular in section for cream. Enough workers should
be provided to wrap and label the cheese without leaving it exposed to
contamination or heat. Parchment paper and tin-foil cut the proper size
for each variety and bearing printed labels are readily obtainable. Each
cheese should be wrapped with paper and tin-foil and put directly into a
flat box which holds a standard number (usually 12 or 24) of the special
product.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--Molding Neufchâtel.]

In working with the hand molding tube (Fig. 15) the same care is
required. Chilled curd is forced into a firm smooth mass with the
plunger. It is removed and wrapped when it reaches the regular size of
the variety.

All forms when molded go directly into the boxes and then back to the
refrigerators until demanded for actual use. The details of the process
differ according to the form made.

+131. Skimmed-milk Neufchâtel.+--Separator skimmed-milk is frequently
made into curd by the Neufchâtel process. The absence of fat eliminates
the largest element of loss in manufacture. Each stage of the making
process, therefore, may be shortened. The demand that the curd shall be
smooth and buttery in texture rather than rough or gritty requires the
exercise of care in curdling of milk. The draining and pressing of the
curd may be accomplished much more rapidly than in the fatty cheeses.
The final product should differ from cottage cheese in smoother texture,
milder acidity and, as a rule, cleaner flavor. In composition, the
absence of fat must be largely compensated by leaving more water in the
cheese. Such a product reaches the market with 65 to 75 per cent of
water and perhaps 1.25 per cent of salt. Casein forms 20 to 30 per cent
of the mass.

These cheeses are very perishable on account of their high
water-content. The destructive effect of microorganisms both in the
interior of the cheese and upon its surface is rapid.

Cheeses of this description may be found in the trade as cottage cheese,
Neufchâtel style, and as Neufchâtel made from skimmed-milk; skimmed-milk
Neufchâtel would be a strictly proper labeling.

+132. Baker's cheese.+--There is considerable market for skimmed-milk
curd as Baker's cheese. This product is essentially skimmed-milk
Neufchâtel curd, partially drained and sold in bulk. When the bakery is
near by, the curd is frequently shoveled into milk-cans in very wet
condition and sent directly from the factory to the bakery. If the
distance is such as to require considerable time for transportation,
the same care is frequently given as for Neufchâtel curd packed in bulk
for storage and transportation.

Great variations in practice are found among the makers of this type of
product. In some cases low grade skimmed-milk is handled on a large
scale. Curdling is done quickly and little care is given to the details
of flavor and texture in the curd. Working in this manner, two men are
able to make a ton of such curd, and ship it out in milk-cans each day.
The resulting product, although very deficient in flavor and texture,
goes into manufactured specialties which conceal its deficiencies if
considered as cheese.

+133. Domestic Neufchâtel.+--The name Neufchâtel, unless limited clearly
by the label, should designate a cheese made from fresh whole milk.
Cheeses of this group are produced in a small number of well-equipped
factories scattered widely through the dairy states of the North and
Northeast. Every factory uses one or more trade names for its product.
The same product is frequently relabeled by the distributor who uses his
own trade name instead of that of the maker.

The usual form of package is cylindrical, about 1¾ inches in diameter
and 2½ inches long, or sometimes rectangular 2½ by 1½ by 1½
inches. The cheese is protected by wrapping in parchment paper closely
surrounded by tin-foil. These packages vary from 2½ to 4 ounces. In
some cases screw-topped glass jars are substituted for the tin-foil
package. They are objectionable, first, because of cost and, second,
because they are so commonly associated with less perishable products as
to mislead either dealer or consumer into holding the product for too
long a time. The paper or tin-foil package can be kept only at
refrigerator temperature, hence automatically keeps its possessor
reminded of the perishable nature of its contents.

Neufchâtel of the best quality made from whole milk testing about 4 per
cent fat may be expected to fall within the following limits;[40] many
grades contain more water than this at the expense of flavor and keeping
quality:

  Water        50-55    per cent
  Fat          23-28    per cent
  Casein       18-21    per cent
  Salt        0.5-1.25  per cent
          Yield 12-14 lb. per 100 lb. of milk.

+134. Partially skim Neufchâtel.+--Brands of Neufchâtel made from milk
that would test every gradation from whole milk to separator
skimmed-milk may be found. The quality of the product varies with the
skill of the maker from brands no better than cottage cheese to products
scarcely distinguishable from the best whole-milk Neufchâtel. Many
factories that produce more than one quality of Neufchâtel use labels of
different color, different design or both to separate them; for example,
blue labels usually stand for whole milk, red labels represent lower
grades. Sometimes the difference in material is indicated by a clear cut
grade mark. Frequently color, a design of label or both are the only
definite marks upon the cheese. The consumer unfamiliar with the trade
practice commonly has no means of knowing the quality of the product
offered. Such cheeses vary in water-content from 55 to 70 per cent; in
fat from 10 to 25 per cent; in casein from 18 to 25 per cent.

+135. Cream cheese.+--The Neufchâtel process is also used to make cream
cheese. The material utilized is commonly what has been called double
cream. This is produced by separating about half of a given volume of
milk and running the cream into the other half. Usually cream cheese is
made in the same factory as various grades of Neufchâtel. No material is
lost. In some instances, cream cheese is prepared by working thick cream
into the Neufchâtel type of curd from practically skimmed-milk. In
working with high percentages of fat in curd, care must be taken to
avoid loss of fat in draining and pressing. The curd is carefully
chilled before pressing to reduce this loss. This may be done under
refrigeration or upon cracked ice. Otherwise the manipulations of the
process are unchanged. The cheeses are commonly molded in the Neufchâtel
machine into square cakes weighing about 4 ounces and measuring
approximately 3 by 2¼ by 7/8 inches. These are wrapped in paper and
tin-foil and handled exactly as Neufchâtel.

Cream cheese of high quality made from reënforced milk testing 7 to 9
per cent fat may be expected to test approximately as follows:[41]

  Water                                      38-43   per cent
  Fat                                        43-48   per cent
  Protein                                    13-16   per cent
  Salt                                      0.5-1.25 per cent
          Yield 16-18 lb. per 100 lb. of cream.

Increases of water, hence greater yields, are very common but usually
associated with loss in quality both as to flavor and texture, and in
more rapid spoilage; certain brands regularly carry 50 to 60 per cent of
fat but their increased cost of manufacture and sale restricts them to
the rôle of specialties with closely limited distribution. Trade names
such as Philadelphia Cream, Cow Brand, Eagle Brand, Square Cream, Blue
Label and many other factory brands are on the market.

+136. Neufchâtel specialties.+--Neufchâtel or cream cheese curd is
frequently mixed with some flavoring substance, such as pimiento
(pickled Spanish peppers), olives, nuts, spices or other cheeses, such
as Roquefort. These bear appropriate trade names and form a very
attractive addition to our varieties of cheese. Among the names found
are Pimiento, Olive, Nut, and Pim-olive or Olimento.

+137. Gervais+ is a brand of cream cheese made in Paris and sold widely
in France and even in other continental countries. It occasionally comes
to America. As made in Paris, these cheeses are flat cakes containing
approximately 40 per cent water and 35-45 per cent fat. It clearly
differs only in detail from the square cream cheeses made in America.
The name Gervais is the property of a particular company. Since the
cheese differs in no essential feature from other cream cheeses, this
name should not be applied to a domestic cream brand.

+138. European forms occasionally imported.+--Among the cheeses related
to Neufchâtel as they reach the market are the "White" cheeses of
southern Europe. These differ greatly in quality according to their
source and to their content of cow, sheep, goat's milk or some
combination of these. This texture and flavor link them with unripened
Neufchâtel. The time required for importation puts a minimum possible
period of ten to fifteen days between production and consumption with a
probable period of at least one month for most samples. As they come to
America, these forms usually show fermentive changes beyond those
tolerated in the domestic product. This may take either of several
forms: (1) intensification of acid flavor with the intensification of
the characteristic flavors of the particular brand; (2) the development
of old or rancid flavors; (3) the development of Oidium and partial
softening of the mass through its agency; (4) the growth of Roquefort
mold and development of the flavor associated with that organism. This
last form was found in a shipment of Hungarian Briuse which showed about
40 per cent fat, 14 per cent protein and 43 per cent water.




CHAPTER VIII

_SOFT CHEESES RIPENED BY MOLD_


The ripened soft cheeses include a series of groups of varieties which,
in addition to initial souring, have been subjected to special ripening
processes, and which in the ripened condition are soft in texture and
mostly have high flavors. The varieties in each group have in common
some essential principles of manufacture together with a ripening
process dominated by a characteristic group of organisms. In certain
groups, the ripening is dominated by a yellowish or orange viscid
surface slime containing _Oidium lactis_ and bacteria; in another
series, the characteristic organism is a mold of the genus Penicillium
(_P. Camemberti_). Referring to the analysis of groups (page 83), the
ripened soft cheeses are found to fall into three well-marked groups,
one of which may perhaps be subdivided as indicated. The series curdled
by souring alone begins with approximately cottage cheese curd and
develops high flavors by ripening, as in "hand" cheese. Ripened
Neufchâtel curdled by souring and rennet together finds its basis in
Neufchâtel curd also but modifies the final product until the familiar
flavor and texture of the unripened form are no longer recognizable.
Among the forms curdled by rennet alone the Camembert series contains
one form, Coulommiers, which is occasionally used unripe, but represents
in general a mold-ripened group of highly flavored forms. The series of
soft rennet cheeses ripened by bacteria may be broadly designated the
Limburger group.

+139. Hand cheese and its allies.+--Among skim cheeses, there is a
series of forms largely German in origin in which curd not far removed
from cottage cheese is the basis of the product. Harz cheese is one of
the best-known of these forms as studied by Eckles and Rahn.[42] One of
these forms, hand cheese,[43] is manufactured on a commercial basis in
farm dairies among families of German descent principally in
Pennsylvania, and on a factory basis in a few places in New York,
northern Illinois and Wisconsin. On the small scale, curd is made by
natural souring or by use of starter, heated to expel water, cooled and
molded by hand into cakes two to three inches in diameter and one-half
to three-quarters inch in thickness. The freshly formed cakes are placed
upon a shelf to dry. There they are turned daily until fairly firm, then
packed in rolls into wooden boxes and ripened in a cool damp room. In
this ripening there is a prompt development of a heavy viscous slime,
which consists of Oidium and bacteria. Other molds forming loose cottony
mycelium are brushed off if they appear. The proper consistency of this
slimy covering depends on a close adjustment of water-content in the
cheese with temperature and relative humidity in the ripening room. If
conditions are too dry, the cheeses harden quickly or if less dry they
are attacked by green or blue-green molds. If too wet, the slimy
covering becomes too soft and watery, or secondarily covered with loose
shimmering masses of mold (Mucor sp.). Ripening should proceed slowly
and occupy a period of six to eight weeks.

+140. Pennsylvania pot cheese.+--A form of "pot" cheese is made in
certain counties of Pennsylvania, principally for local use. Production
of this cheese on a factory basis is now being attempted. The steps in
manufacture are about as follows:[44] (1) The home-made type of cottage
cheese curd is prepared, put into a crock or pot and covered carefully;
(2) kept in a warm place (in kitchen usually); (3) stirred from time to
time, until it has ripened to a semi-liquid condition. This occurs very
rapidly under the attack of _Oidium lactis_ accompanied by bacteria.
Within a period of three to seven days, according to the temperature and
to the water-content of the mass, the granules of curd become covered
with a wrinkled gelatinous almost viscid mass of mold mycelium beneath
which is a layer of semi-liquid curd with a strong characteristic odor
and taste. This ripened or semi-liquid part reaches about half the total
mass in four or five days at favorable temperatures. (4) The vessel is
then placed in a larger vessel of water and heated over the fire with
constant stirring until the whole mass is melted and smooth. (5) Butter
or cream, and salt or other flavor is finally added, stirred in and the
liquid cheese poured into molds or jelly glasses to cool. If properly
made and cooked, the resultant cheese has a soft buttery consistency
with an agreeable flavor, which frequently resembles that of Camembert
cheese.

+141. Appetitost (Appetite cheese).+--A Danish buttermilk cheese is made
under this name. Sour buttermilk is heated, by some to boiling
temperature but others (Monrad[45]) prefer 120° F., stirred thoroughly
and allowed to settle. The whey is removed as far as possible. The
semi-liquid mass is covered and set in a warm place. Fermentation
becomes active. This tends to make the curd more viscous or sticky. It
is then kneaded and allowed to ferment again. This process is repeated
until the mass is yellowish and soft but tough or viscous. When
thoroughly fermented, the mass is again heated to 120° F., and 6 per
cent salt is added together with spice; both are worked in and the
cheese is formed into fancy shapes for sale.

+142. Ripened Neufchâtel, French process.+--Neufchâtel as a ripened
cheese is made rather widely in France but it is produced on an
especially large scale in Seine-Inferieure.[46] Some factories use whole
milk, or milk with added cream, others skimmed-milk.[47] The whole-milk
brands of Neufchâtel are those which have the widest reputation. For
making this cheese, the working room is held as closely as possible at
15-16° C. (58-60° F.). The milk is strained into earthen vessels holding
twenty liters. Rennet is added to the freshly drawn milk at about 30° C.
(86° F.) in amount sufficient to produce coagulation in about
twenty-four hours. Draining racks of various forms are covered with
cloth. The vessels of curd are dumped upon the racks. The whey separates
slowly and drains off through the cloth. About twelve hours are allowed
for this process. The corners of the cloth are then brought together
and folded in or tied and the mass pressed to complete the drainage. The
finished curd is worked or kneaded to produce a smooth and uniform
texture. This process of curd-making is essentially the same as the
American factory process of making Neufchâtel. The ripening process has
been entirely dropped in America. The curd is finally molded in metal
forms 5 cm. (2 inches) in diameter and about 6.7 cm. (about 3 inches)
high, open at both ends. These molds are filled, the freshly formed
cheeses are pressed out with a plunger or piston and their surfaces
smoothed with a wooden knife.

After molding is completed, the cheeses are salted by sprinkling the
entire surface with fine dry salt as the cheese is held in the hand. In
this way each cheese receives and absorbs 3 to 4 per cent salt. After
salting, the cheeses are arranged upon boards and allowed to drain
twenty-four hours. They are then removed to the first or drying room.
The frames of the drying room (secherie) are covered with straw and the
cheeses are placed carefully upon the straw to avoid contact with each
other. They are turned each day to present a fresh surface to the straw
during a period of two to three weeks in the drying room (secherie).
Mold begins to show as white cottony mycelium after five to six days,
and slowly turns to "blue" (bluish green). When the cheeses are well
covered with this moldy rind, they are removed to the ripening cellar.
In the ripening cellar also the cheeses stand upon straw. They are
turned over every three or four days at first, then allowed to stand for
a longer period.

When ripe, a Neufchâtel cheese so made weighs about 125 grams. One
liter of milk makes 225 grams of such cheese. The ripening of Neufchâtel
has never been fully studied, but a series of these cheeses were
obtained by one of the authors; cultures were made and examined.[48] The
salt-content in the first place was found to be so high that _Oidium
lactis_ was eliminated as an active factor in the ripening. The mold
proved to be on some cheeses _Penicillium Camemberti_, the typical mold
of Camembert as it is made in Normandy, on others _P. Camemberti_ var.
_Rogeri_, the pure white form as used under the patents of M. Georges
Roger in the region of Seine-et-Marne to the eastward of Paris and
called by him and by Mazé _P. candidum_. The physical condition of the
ripened curd and the flavors encountered were those associated with
these two species by many hundreds of experiments during the Camembert
investigation in Connecticut.[49] These facts justify the conclusion
that ripened Neufchâtel is first soured by lactic organisms, then so
salted as to eliminate or reduce to a minimum the characteristic
activities of _Oidium lactis_, while the proteolytic action and the
physical changes are closely similar to those of Camembert which is
ripened primarily by the same molds.

+143. The Camembert group.+--The soft cheeses ripened by molds are
French in origin. Their manufacture has spread into Germany, Italy and
America. Of the series, the most widely known is Camembert, which will
be described as typical for the group. Brie, Coulommiers, Robbiola and
Ripened Neufchâtel belong to this series.

+144. Camembert cheese.+--The origin of Camembert is given by French
authorities as 1791 in the Commune of Camembert near Vimoutiers in Orne,
France. From a very restricted production at first, Camembert-making has
spread through the region from Caen in the west to Havre, Rouen and a
considerable area east of Paris. In America Camembert began to be made
in one factory about 1900. Several other factories followed by 1906. The
difficulties and losses encountered led to the abandonment of these
undertakings, until at the outbreak of the European war in 1914 but one
factory was making Camembert and that only on an experimental scale.
Meanwhile the United States Department of Agriculture and the Storrs
Experiment Station had taken up and solved, on an experimental basis,
most of the problems arising in these commercial failures. A shortage of
product at the outbreak of the war brought about the re-establishment of
a series of factories. The product as put on the market indicates that a
permanent establishment of Camembert-making is entirely practicable.

Camembert cheese is made from cow's milk either whole or very slightly
skimmed; the removal of about 0.5 per cent of fat has been found to be
desirable if not actually necessary.

+145. Description of Camembert.+[50]--These cheeses are made in sizes
2½ to 4½ inches in diameter and 1¼ to 1½ inches in thickness. They are
ripened by the agency of molds and bacteria which form a felt-like rind
over their whole surface, 1/16 to 1/8 of an inch in thickness. This rind
may be dry and gray or grayish-green, consisting of a felt-like surface
of mold on the outside, below which a harder portion consists of mold
embedded in partially dried cheese, or the moldy part may be more or
less completely overgrown or displaced by yellowish or reddish slime
composed mainly of bacteria. Good cheeses may have either appearance.

Inside the rind, the cheese is softened progressively from the rind
toward the center from all sides, so that a fully ripe cheese has no
hard sour curd in the center, but is completely softened. No mold should
be visible inside the rind, but the moldy rind itself is necessary
because the ripening is caused by the enzymes secreted by the organisms
of the rind into the cheese. As the curd ripens, the changed portion
assumes a slightly deeper color than the unripe curd as a result of
chemical changes. Well-ripened cheeses vary from nearly a fluid texture
to the consistency of moderately soft butter. The ripening of Camembert
is finished in wooden boxes which protect the cheeses from breaking
after they become soft and during the market period.

+146. Conditions of making and ripening.+--These processes depend on a
very close adjustment between the composition of the freshly made cheese
and the temperature and humidity of the rooms in which the cheeses are
made and ripened. Very slight failures in control bring loss in ultimate
results. The room for making Camembert should be maintained between 60°
and 70° F. and should be wet enough to reduce drying to a minimum. The
essentials of apparatus are comparatively inexpensive. Work on a factory
basis calls, however, for the installation of special tables and other
apparatus to utilize space and labor to advantage. Rooms are protected
from change of weather by double sash in the windows. Flies must be
excluded by close-meshed screens for all doors and windows with movable
sash. The equipment installed in such a room is shown in Fig. 18.
Curdling cans are ranged on a shelf a few inches above the floor along
one side of the room below an open tin trough with side branches. This
open trough brings the milk from the mixing vat to the curdling cans.
(The open tin trough offers no lodgment for dirt.) The cans hold about
200 pounds of milk, are about 12 inches in diameter at bottom, and 20 to
24 inches at top. They are heavily tinned. Iron trucks as high as the
shelf and with tops the same diameter as the bottoms of the cans form a
convenient method of bringing cans of curd to the very edge of the
draining tables.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Camembert cheese-making room in an American
factory.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Draining mat for Camembert cheese.]

The wooden draining tables are placed about 32 inches above the floor;
they are usually made of 2-inch lumber, have raised edges and slope
slightly toward the wall. Whey and wash water are thus carried to a
draining trough along the wall. For cheese-making, each is covered with
a strip of matting consisting of wooden strips held together by thread
(Fig. 19). The strip of matting should be exactly the width and length
of the table. The hoops used are heavy tin, with edges turned and
soldered, about 5 inches high, 4-5/8 inches in diameter with three rows
of holes about 1/12 inch in diameter and 2 inches apart in the row.
These hoops are placed as thickly as possible upon the mats.

+147. Outline of making process.+--The making process[51] is summarized
as follows (Thom, 1909):

_Starter._--From 0.5 to 1.0 per cent of active starter is added to milk
kept overnight below 60°F.

_Acidity at renneting._--Milk titrated to phenolphthalein should test
0.20 to 0.23 per cent calculated as lactic acid.

_Temperance of renneting._--84°-86° F. is used for Camembert.

_Rennet._--From 3 to 5 oz. of standard rennet extract to 1000 lb. milk
(10-15 c.c. per 100 lb. milk) produces a curd of proper texture.

_Curdling time._--To reach the proper condition for handling, 1¼ to
1½ hours or longer is required. This is indicated by the onset of
"sweating" or the separation of large drops of whey on the surface of
the solid curd.

_Dipping._--A long-handled dipper is used to transfer curd from cans to
hoops. This can be lowered into the hoop. This transfer is to be done
with the least possible breaking. One dipperful is transferred at a time
to each of a series of hoops. By the time the series is covered, some
drainage has occurred and a second dipperful is added to the contents of
the hoop. In this way the hoop is filled within a period of two to four
hours.

_Draining._--Hoops when properly filled have taken in approximately 2
quarts of milk each. No pressure is used. Cheeses drain by gravity. They
stand unturned until the following morning when they should be firm
enough to permit turning without removing the hoops. The cheeses when
firm enough to handle (usually on the third morning) are salted by
dusting the entire surface with coarse salt and permitting all that
adheres to remain. The cheeses should then be removed to a room at about
58°F. to prevent too rapid leakage of water and salt from their
surfaces. Ripe cheeses of good quality show a total salt-content varying
from 2.25 to 3 per cent with an average of about 2.5 per cent. When so
handled there is slight, if any, loss of water and salt in the salting
period of twenty-four to forty-eight hours. At the end of the salting
period such cheeses should carry 55 to 57 per cent water or slightly
more.

+148. Acidity.+--The essential biological factor in the making period of
Camembert is proper souring. The milk should be free from gassy
organisms. The lactic starter required should introduce the typical
lactic organism (_Streptococcus lacticus_) in numbers sufficient to
suppress all other forms during the next twenty-four hours. The amount
of acid starter introduced, however, plus the acid resulting from growth
during the curdling period, should not produce a grainy acid curd. The
temperatures of handling are such as to favor this group of organisms if
properly introduced and permit the development of nearly 1 per cent of
acid (estimated as lactic) by the second morning. Cheeses with such acid
are fairly free from further danger from bacterial activity. Members of
the high-acid group (_B. Bulgaricus_ and allies) may be found in these
cheeses but do not appear to develop in numbers sufficient to affect the
cheese to any marked degree.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Halloir, the first ripening room for Camembert
in an American factory.]

                       CAMEMBERT CHEESE RECORD

  Date_______________   Set__________ No._____

  Amt. milk___________  No. cheese_____  Milk per cheese________

  Producer of milk_______________

  Apparent cleanliness of milk_______________

  +Acidity:+

      Before adding starter____________________

      After adding starter____________________

      After acidity period____________________

      Whey at dipping_______________

  +Starter:+

      Kind_______________  Age_____   Amt_____

  +Color:+

      Amount_______________

  +Curdling:+

      Temperature used__________

      Amount of rennet__________

      Time at which rennet is added__________

      Time at which milk is curdled__________

      Time of curdling__________

      Quality of curd____________________

  +Dipping:+

      Cut or uncut_______________

      Amt. of cutting_______________

  +Draining:+

      Temperature of room during__________

      Condition of cheese after____________________

  +Salting:+

      Time of_____  Total amt. of salt used_____  Kind of salt_____

      Amt. of salt per cheese_____

  +Mold inoculation:+

      Form of culture used_______________

      Method of inoculation______________

      Time of inoculation__________

  +Remarks on making:+

  +Curing:+

      Transfer of curing rooms_________________________

      Condition of cheese______________________________

      Rooms____________________________________________

      Dates____________________________________________

  +Mold growth:+
      Date of first appearance____________________
      Purity and vigor____________________________
      Date of changing color______________________

  +Surface of slimy growth:+
      Extent of___________________________________
      General character of________________________

  +Surface contamination:+
      Mold________________________________________
      Oidium______________________________________
      Yeast_______________________________________
      Bacterial___________________________________

  +Wrapping:+
      Date_______________   Material____________________
      Condition of cheese_________________________

  +Ripening:+
      Rapidity of_________________________________
      Texture_____________________________________

  +Flavor:+
      Ripened curd________________________________
      Unripened curd______________________________

  +Special treatment and reasons for same:+

  Record of treatment by days____________________

  Room__________   Date__________    Observations.____________________

          1 D_____   16 D_____
          2 D_____   17 D_____
          3 D_____   18 D_____
          4 D_____   19 D_____
          5 D_____   20 D_____
          6 D_____   21 D_____
          7 D_____   22 D_____
          8 D_____   23 D_____
          9 D_____   24 D_____
         10 D_____   25 D_____
         11 D_____   26 D_____
         12 D_____   27 D_____
         13 D_____   28 D_____
         14 D_____   29 D_____
         15 D_____   30 D_____
                     31 D_____

+149. Ripening the cheese.+--The cheese is now ready for the ripening
rooms (Fig. 20). For this process temperatures between 52° and 58°F. are
desirable; lower temperatures only delay the process; higher
temperatures favor undesirable fermentations. The cheeses rest upon
coarse matting (Fr. clayons) consisting of round wooden rods about the
size of a pencil separated 1-1¼ inches and held in position by wire
strands. Assuming cheeses of optimum composition as indicated above, the
relative humidity of the ripening rooms should be 86 to 88 per cent.
Higher humidities produce too rapid development of slimy coatings; too
low humidity is indicated by drying, shrinkage and the growth of green
molds on the surface. A slight and very slow evaporation is demanded; by
this the water-content of the cheeses is reduced 3 to 6 per cent in two
weeks. During the first two weeks of ripening, the cheeses commonly show
some growth of yeast and _Oidium lactis_ first, followed by cottony
white areas of Camembert mold (_Penicillium Camemberti_). This mold must
be introduced by inoculation in new factories but once firmly
established in the factory will propagate itself if conditions are kept
favorable. Climatic conditions in most dairy sections of America have
been sufficiently unfavorable to make more or less continuous use of
pure cultures desirable. At the end of two weeks, Camembert cheeses
should show a well-established rind, consisting of a well-matted felt
work of mold hyphæ through the outer 2 mm. (1/12 inch) of the whole
surface of the cheese. More or less of the pale gray-green fruit of the
characteristic _Penicillium Camemberti_ can usually be seen. Beginning
at about twelve to fourteen days,[52] a softening of the curd is first
directly detectable under the rind. This is preceded by the
disappearance of the acidity of the curd, which progresses inward. The
softening of the curd follows closely the lowering of the acidity. Thus
a litmus test taken along the cut face of a Camembert cheese at any
stage of softening will always show a sharp acid reaction in the solid
sour portion which changes to alkaline just before the softening due to
proteolytic action becomes noticeable. These two changes appear to be
due to enzymes secreted by the mycelium of the _Penicillium Camemberti_
and _Oidium lactis_ which constitute the most active factors in the
ripening. Some accessory bacterial action is indicated but of minor
importance in the changes found.

To avoid loss from breaking, after the softening of the curd has fairly
begun, the cheeses must be removed from the coarse matting to smooth
boards where they are watched and turned repeatedly, or as in the more
common practice, wrapped at once in parchment paper and boxed. The
ripening may be completed in either way. The conditions necessary are
such as to favor the extension of slimy areas of bacteria over part or
all of the rind to the exclusion of further development of gray-green
fruiting areas of mold.

Complete softening may occur in three weeks in cheeses in which
evaporation has gone on too slowly. Such cheeses are found to contain 51
to 55 per cent of water when ripe and decay very quickly. If handled
properly, the water-content should fall from about 57 per cent at the
beginning of ripening to 48 per cent at its completion which should
require a minimum period of about four weeks. It is more desirable that
a cheese four weeks old show a thin core of sour curd in the center than
that it be entirely liquid at that age.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--Very soft Camembert cheese.]

+150. Composition.+--Properly ripe Camembert shows about the following
range of composition: Water 47 to 49 per cent; fat 25 to 28 per cent;
protein 18 to 21 per cent; salt 2.2 per cent to 2.8 per cent. Variations
outside these limits are usually associated with less desirable
qualities. The approximate limits and characters outlined for Camembert
still leave a considerable latitude for variations in practice which
characterize the output of particular factories in a producing group. At
one extreme are brands of Camembert cheese which are very soft (Fig.
21), some of them actually liquid when ripe, and which have very strong
odor and taste; one such brand has held first place in the trade of
certain American cities for years. Another popular brand when fully ripe
is well covered with yellow-orange viscid slime[53] but is fairly firm
in texture with high flavor; still others show dry moldy surfaces and
mild flavors. The product of certain factories is always characterized
by the presence and characteristic ammoniacal odor of _Penicillium
brevicaule_.

Each of these forms seems to appeal to some classes of consumers, so
that in handling imported Camembert the trade comes to assign the
product to specific groups of purchasers according to the conditions
observed at its arrival from Europe.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Camembert cheese factory at Lisieux, France.
The square windows are seen in the second-floor rooms.]

+151. Factory.+--The type of factory to be used in making and ripening
Camembert must be adjusted to the climate. This product originated in
the Normandy section of France which is but a few feet above sea level,
is swept by winds from the Gulf Stream, and has a narrow range of
temperature, with highly humid conditions. In that region, every effort
must be made to secure ventilation to carry off the necessary amount of
evaporation water. In contrast, most of the dairy sections of America
have land instead of sea breezes, much higher altitudes, much greater
extremes of temperature and a lower range of relative humidities. The
conditions of an upstairs room full of windows in Normandy (Fig. 22) are
most readily reproduced in rooms partly or completely below ground in
this country. The industry calls for the production and maintenance of a
specific set of working conditions. These are furnished by nature in
northern France, probably also in certain Pacific coast areas, but must
be artificially obtained where the climate is unfavorable.

+152. Economic factors.+--Camembert cheeses show a yield of about 13
pounds to 100 pounds of milk testing 4 per cent fat. At roughly one-half
pound each, the number of cheeses will be approximately twenty-six.
Assuming no losses and a wholesale price of 15 cents each, the wholesale
value of 100 pounds of milk would be $3.90. The labor cost of production
is high, the package represents (box, wrapping and label) at least 1½
cents a cheese. The time between the purchase and the consumption of the
cheese will average about one month. Few cheeses actually remain this
length of time in the possession of the maker. This short investment
period, therefore, is a distinct advantage of Camembert. Among
disadvantages, however, the extremely perishable character of the fully
ripe cheese makes provision of an adequate and constant market
essential. Losses due to failures in manufacturing or ripening
conditions are also frequent. Excessive heat in summer and very cold
periods in winter are both unfavorable. The Camembert-maker cannot,
therefore, use the cheapest milk of the summer months at all and the
losses entailed by failure of control in winter fall on the most costly
milk of the year. Camembert requires, therefore, careful selection of
the location for manufacture and ripening, effective control of
conditions throughout the period and adequate marketing facilities.
Camembert at its best is one of the finest of all cheeses; when bad, it
becomes quickly inedible and is a total loss.

+153. French Brie.+[54]--Brie cheese has its center of production in
Seine-et-Marne, east of Paris in northern France. The apparatus,
arrangement of the factories and details of manipulation differ from
those described for Camembert, but the final product is in flavor and
texture closely related to Camembert. Brie cheeses are the same
thickness as Camembert, 1 to 1¼ inches; in diameter, however, there
are three or more sizes varying from 8 to 16 inches, or even greater.
The largest cheeses weigh 5 to 6 pounds. As in Camembert, practices of
making and ripening vary to such a degree as to produce various
qualities of product. These run from whole milk through all shades of
skimming. Perhaps the best established practice puts the cheese-making
room next to the stalls of the cows. The milk is drawn, strained
directly into the curdling cans and renneted while still warm,--86-92°
F. (30-33° C.). No lactic starter is added and no ripening period is
given to the milk. The other manipulations differ only in detail from
Camembert. Ripening of Brie follows the same course with the same
organic agents, namely, Camembert mold (_Penicillium Camemberti_) and
_Oidium lactis_ with the accompaniment of a mixture of slimy organisms
upon the surface of the cheese. The process admits of many minor
modifications each capable of affecting the product in a characteristic
way. The judgment and skill of the maker is given a wide opportunity to
establish and work toward a particular ideal of appearance and texture
and flavor. Brands with characteristic qualities, therefore, command
their own market.

Brie as known in France must not be confused with the American
"d'Isigny," or with the particular sizes of that type which have been
called Brie on account of diameter only. Very little Brie as known in
France has been made in America and only a limited amount has been
imported for very restricted trade.

+154. Coulommiers.+--Another member of the Camembert group is called,
from its place of origin, Coulommiers. This form is made at the same
thickness as Camembert and about 5¼ inches in diameter. It appears as
either a ripened or unripe cheese. As a ripened cheese, Coulommiers is
not essentially different from Camembert except that some brands are
made without salting. As a cheese eaten unripe, it has certain
advantages over the other cheeses with the flavor of sour milk only. The
cottage and (American) Neufchâtel group of cheeses comprises the best
known forms with the acid flavor. These cheeses are very perishable in
nature. On the other hand, Coulommiers as eaten fresh can be held and
used over a much longer time without loss. Coulommiers[55] in this sense
is simply a fresh Camembert. Such a cheese, when ready for the salting
process, is a firm sour mass, close textured, almost impervious to air
and but slowly permeable to liquids. Spoilage in such a cheese begins
only on the outside, and not throughout the mass as in cottage cheese or
Neufchâtel. Successive portions of such a cheese can be removed daily
over a considerable period with no loss of substance aside from slight
scraping at times and little or no change in flavor. This product has
very tangible merit for manufacture and use on the farm in many sections
of America.




CHAPTER IX

_SOFT CHEESES RIPENED BY BACTERIA_


A bacterially-ripened series of cheeses parallels the mold-ripened group
as typified by Camembert. Although the varieties overlap, these may be
roughly grouped as: (1) those made from friable or soft curd; (2) those
made from firm or rubbery curd. In the first group, the curd is set at
86° F., or below; in the second, the rennet is added at 90° F. or above.
In the first, the lower temperature and long curdling time with ripened
milk gives a soft friable curd which may be toughened somewhat by
cutting and stirring in the whey. This section is typified by d'Isigny,
American Brie, Liederkranz. In the second, curdling of unripened milk at
temperatures of 90° F. or above insures a smooth elastic curd which
fuses more or less completely into the firm rubbery mass typified by
freshly made Limburger.

+155. The Isigny group.+--A series of names, d'Isigny, Brie, Brie
d'Isigny, combined with trade names, are used for a domestic cheese,
made in a small number of factories distributed over New York,
Pennsylvania, Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa and California. The
cheeses sold under the separate varietal names differ only in diameter;
their thickness is fairly uniform; the process of manufacture and
ripening with resultant textures and flavors furnishes no fundamental
varietal characters, although the products of the several factories show
noticeable differences in market quality. D'Isigny, while the name of a
French town famous for butter production, is not used to designate a
cheese in France. It may, therefore, be accepted as a French name
arbitrarily applied to a domestic product. Brie as used in France is a
markedly different cheese (p. 131), and the name should be dropped from
this form as made in America. As used for a member of this series made
in America, it merely means cheese 7 to 15 inches in diameter. The
cheese partakes of the characters of French Livarot, and of Pont
l'Eveque without exactly reproducing either form.

The milk varies from separator skim to whole milk, with resultant
differences in quality. Freedom from gas is essential to the best
results. The milk is curdled at 85° to 86° F. with sufficient rennet to
produce a very firm curd within a period of one and one-half hours. Curd
is then cut in two directions, allowed to stand a few minutes or gently
agitated to produce a very slight toughness or "worked" condition, then
scooped into hoops 4½ to 5 inches in height and varying in diameter
from 2½ to 15 inches according to the size selected for manufacture.
To aid in the escape of whey, three rows of holes 1/12 inch in diameter
and 2 inches apart in the row are made in each hoop. The hoops are
arranged upon draining tables with more or less corrugated surface,
which for best drainage should be covered with matting. The cheeses are
allowed to drain without pressure. They are commonly turned the second
morning, although they are sometimes solid enough to turn within the
first day. When fully drained, the cheeses are salted by rubbing coarse
salt on the surface, after which they stand an extra day. They are then
arranged upon shelves in a ripening room held between 50° and 60° F.
with humidity so high that evaporation is kept at a minimum. In this
room, a surface slime develops quickly. This consists of bacteria of
several forms, yeasts, _Oidium lactis_ and accidental species of other
molds. During this ripening, the cheeses are turned, rubbed with the
hands, washed with salt water and scraped if infected with molds which
produce colored colonies. In the course of ripening, the slimy surface
layer acquires a yellowish orange color with the strong odor and taste
characteristic of the series.

Brands of d'Isigny are made from every grade between separator skim and
whole milk. They reach the market in condition all the way from "Kosher"
forms[56] which are eaten entirely unripe, to brands which approximate
the qualities of Limburger and others which approach Port du Salut.

The biology and chemistry of the ripening of this type of cheese have
not been completely followed. An initial souring process always takes
place quickly. _Oidium lactis_ is always present in some degree on the
surface, but the organisms in the yellowish to orange slime on the
surface of the cheese appear to produce the characteristic odor and
taste. These appear to be due to the development of volatile fatty
acids, such as valerianic and caproic, which diffuse throughout the
cheese, even penetrating the unripened sour portions. The same odor and
taste in varying intensity are present in Limburger, Brick, and a long
series of German varieties not handled in America.

High-flavored cheeses such as these, form an acceptable part of the meal
in cases in which the intensity of other flavors is such as to mask
entirely the milder flavors of Camembert or cream cheese.

In composition, a characteristic whole-milk brand of this group showed
the following analysis:[57] water, 45.5 per cent; fat, 25.28 per cent;
protein, 18.22 per cent.

+156. Raffiné.+[58]--This cheese is made in the French settlement of the
Isle of Orleans in the St. Lawrence River. The practice seems to have
been brought from France and represents an intermediate product between
Camembert and perhaps Livarot, a cheese on the borderline between
Camembert and Isigny as made in America. The outline of the making
process as given follows: Milk freshly drawn is curdled without cooling,
at approximately 90° F. The rennet is prepared on the farm. About
one-half hour is required for curdling. The curd is cut into 2-inch
cubes. Whey is removed as fast as it separates. About two hours are
required for draining. The curd then goes into the hoops. The metal
hoops, which are closed at one end, are 6 inches high, 4½ inches in
diameter, with holes about 1/16 inch at intervals of about ½ inch, and
stand upon three legs about 1 inch in height. When filled, the cheeses
are left on a draining table. Some salt is put on top while draining.
When the volume is reduced to one-half, the cheese is turned. The
draining room is kept at about 70° F. After they are firm enough to
handle, drainage is completed on racks covered with rush matting. These
are arranged on special racks. The cheeses are turned twice a day, and
washed in slightly salted water every two days. After each washing, they
are drained for two hours on cloth, and placed on clean matting. This
treatment continues about fifteen days.

After fifteen days on the matting, the cheeses are ready for ripening.
They are first covered with cold brine and let stand twenty-four hours.
The cheeses are packed in rolls or tiers in boxes, covered with cloth
and ripened at 45° F. They must be kept moist; if signs of drying
appear, moisture must be added. If the cheeses develop yellow slime,
they are washed with clear water and rinsed in water with salt added.
After a ripening period of three weeks, the cheeses should begin to be
soft when pressed with the finger. The growth of molds must be prevented
by washing the boxes, cloths, and washing and scraping the cheeses if
necessary. When the cheeses are ready for the market, they are scraped
clean and white, wrapped separately in cheese-cloth or parchment paper
and packed into the boxes. Ripe cheeses are about 5 inches in diameter,
1 inch thick and weigh a little over 5 ounces.

The outline of the Raffiné process follows:

  coagulation by rennet       30 minutes
  cutting and draining curd    2 hours
  draining in hoops           10 hours
  stand on mats               15 days
  ripening in boxes           21 days
    Total period              36 days

The treatment described closely resembles the handling of Livarot cheese
in the department of Calvados, France.

+157. Liederkranz cheese.+--Among the specialties in the bacterial group
is Liederkranz, made from curd with the soft friable texture of a
Camembert, molded in rectangular blocks of about 4 ounces in weight and
ripened very completely. Although this name is the private brand of a
single factory, it has become widely known with the effect of creating a
type name in the American market. Analysis of this brand of cheese
gives about 55 per cent water, 25 per cent fat, 17 per cent protein,
which indicates a whole milk cheese.

+158. Limburger cheese+[59] derives its name from the town of Limburg in
Belgium. The manufacture of this cheese is now widely practiced in
Europe and in certain parts of the United States, especially in New York
and Wisconsin. Practically no cheese of this name is at present
imported, and the practices described are limited to those in American
factories.

+159. The milk.+--Limburger cheese is probably best known on account of
its pronounced odor. Because of this characteristic pungent smell, it is
often thought that the cheese is made in dirty or unsanitary places. On
the contrary, Limburger cheese is usually made in small factories which
are clean and sanitary. Because of the constant attention required, a
cheese-maker can handle only about 2000-2500 pounds of milk a day, and
then some help is necessary to care for the cheeses in the curing
room.[60] The discussion of the milk given in Chapter II applies to that
to be made into Limburger cheese; however, Limburger requires sweeter
milk than do some of the other types. To be sure of obtaining very sweet
milk, it is the usual practice for the milk to be delivered without
cooling morning and evening at the cheese factory. The cheese is made
twice a day. Because the milk must be delivered twice daily, it is
obtained from only a few producers near the factory. A factory usually
does not have more than eight to twelve patrons. Because of the small
number of patrons, it is comparatively easy to obtain a supply of fresh
clean milk.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--A common type of Limburger cheese factory.]

The factories are variously built. A common type takes advantage of
sloping ground so that the floor at one end may be on the ground level
and run backward into a hillside until the other end is a cellar with
small windows at the ceiling opening at the ground level (Fig. 23). The
family of the cheese-maker often lives in the same building above the
factory.

+160. Making the cheese.+--Limburger cheese is made from the whole milk.
When the milk is received at the factory, it is placed in the cheese
vat. As the milk is delivered both morning and evening without cooling,
it reaches the factory at a temperature of 90 to 96° F. In some cases
the night's and morning's milk is mixed and then warmed to about 94° F.
This practice is not recommended but is frequently adopted, when the
supply of milk becomes too small to work in two lots. As soon as all of
the milk has been delivered, the cheese-making process begins. No
starter is used. The milk is not ripened because no acid development
during the making process is desired. The milk is set or curdled at the
temperature at which it is received at the factory, usually from 90 to
96° F. Sufficient rennet extract is used to give a firm coagulation in
twenty to thirty minutes. This usually requires 2½ to 3 ounces of
rennet extract for each 1000 pounds of milk: This is diluted in about
forty times its own volume of cold water and added to the milk. (For
method of adding rennet extract to milk, see Chapter V.) When the
coagulum has become firm so that it will split clean over the finger,
the curd is ready to cut. Coarse Cheddar cheese knives are used.
Sometimes only the perpendicular knife is employed, and the curd is
broken up while being stirred with the hands and rake. This usually
causes a large fat loss. After cutting, the curd is stirred first by
hand and later with an ordinary wooden hay rake. Usually the curd is not
"cooked" or heated after setting, though occasionally it is brought up
as high as 96° F. to 98° F. If the curd does not firm up, the
temperature may be raised to 98° to 100° F. to aid in expelling the
moisture.

When ready to dip, the curd should still be in large soft shiny pieces.
It requires from one hour to an hour and thirty minutes from the time
the rennet extract is added until the curd is ready to dip. When, in the
judgment of the cheese-maker, the curd has become sufficiently firmed in
the whey, the whey is drawn down to the surface of the curd. The curd is
then dipped into the Limburger molds. These molds are 5 inches square by
8 inches deep without top or bottom. Usually there are five or six of
these molds built together into a section. These molds are placed on a
draining table beside the vat and the curd is ladled into them with a
large tin ladle. The draining table has strips on both sides and one end
and slants toward the other end so that the whey will drain from the
curd and yet not go on the floor except at the one end. This makes it
easy to save and catch the whey for stock feed.

+161. Draining and salting Limburger.+--In some factories, a clean piece
of burlap is put on the draining table and the molds and curd placed on
the burlap. This aids in the rapid draining of the whey from the curd
and prevents the loss of curd particles. The curd should be turned
frequently in the mold to obtain uniform draining. The molds are
transferred to the salting room as soon as well drained, usually in
about twelve hours, but sometimes they are left until the following
morning. Here they are placed on another draining table, which has
strips about 5 inches high on the sides and one end. The cheeses are
placed along this board, each cheese being separated by a piece of board
4 inches high and 5 inches wide. When the row is filled, a long strip
the length of the table is placed against the row. Another row is laid
down against this strip in the same manner as the first, and so on until
several rows are on the table. The last long strip is held firmly in
place by sticks wedged between it and the opposite side of the table.
These strips and pieces form a mold for each cheese while draining.
Usually the cheeses are turned several times in this period to obtain a
uniform expulsion of whey. In about twenty-four hours the cheeses are
ready to be salted. This is done by applying the salt to the outside of
the cheese. The edges are rolled in a box of salt and the salt then
rubbed on the two broad surfaces. Any excess salt is brushed from the
cheese with the hand. The cheeses are then laid on a draining table in
single layers. The second day, they are salted again in the same way and
piled two deep; they are salted again the third day and piled three or
four layers deep. The salting room or cellar should have a temperature
of 60° F. and be fairly damp. The amount of salt used is very important.
The tendency is to use too much salt. This retards the ripening process
and in extreme cases gives the cheese a salty taste. If not enough salt
is used, the cheese will deteriorate very rapidly on account of the
development of undesirable types of fermentation. The cheeses when
salted are then placed in the curing room, which is a cellar, usually
beyond the salting room. This cellar should have a temperature of 58° to
64° F. and a relative humidity of 95 per cent of saturation. In winter
it is necessary to have a fire to keep the rooms warm, otherwise the
cheese would cure very slowly or not at all. In some factories the
curing and salting cellars are a single room.

+162. Ripening Limburger.+--When first placed in the curing cellar, the
cheeses are put on edge close together, and as they cure are gradually
separated. While in the curing cellar, the cheese must be rubbed
frequently by hand and washed, usually with salt water. The object of
the rubbing is to keep the surface of the cheese moist and prevent the
growth of molds. The drier the cheese and the more mold, the oftener the
cheeses must be rubbed. The drying or the evaporation from the cheese
can be retarded by sprinkling the floor of the cellar with water. When
first placed in the curing cellar, they are usually rubbed daily; after
a few days they are rubbed every other day and finally as often as the
cheese-maker can find time to work at them. The more the cheeses are
rubbed, the better the rind.

In the curing of Limburger cheese, protein compounds are attacked by the
micro-organisms. Certain highly-flavored fatty acids are commonly
produced.[61] This change works most rapidly near the outside and more
slowly toward the center of the cheese. The stage of ripening can be
determined by examining the cheese. When first made, a cheese is harsh
and hard and the outside is more or less white: as the curing changes
take place, the cheese becomes soft and pasty or buttery. The outside
color changes from a whitish to a yellowish and finally even a reddish
brown. It requires considerable time for the ripening agents to work
from the outside to the center of the cheese. As ripening progresses,
Limburger cheeses tend to become soft enough to break in handling. If
such cheeses are wrapped in manila paper after three to four weeks of
ripening and packed in boxes, losses from handling are eliminated. One
loose board is left on each box and the boxes remain in the ripening
cellar until the cheese-maker decides by removal and examination of
cheeses from time to time that they are ready for shipment. When fully
ripe, the cheese spoils very quickly. Unless handled very carefully, the
outer part may actually rot before the interior is fully ripe. The
cheeses are shipped from the factory when they are eight to ten weeks
old. They are then placed in cold storage, which checks the action of
the ripening agents and so lengthens the commercial life of the cheese.

+163. Marketing and qualities of Limburger.+--As shipped from the
factory, each cheese is wrapped in heavy manila paper and frequently
also in tin-foil. The cheeses are packed in boxes which hold
forty-eight. Each cheese weighs about two pounds.

Limburger cheese should be regular in shape. The rind should not be
cracked or broken nor the sides bulged, nor should it be lopsided. It
should have the pronounced characteristic flavor, without other
objectionable flavors due to undesirable fermentations. The body should
be uniform throughout. It is common to find cheeses that have not a
uniform body, due to lack of curing; a small part of the interior at the
center will be hard and not cured, while the remainder of the cheese
will be soft and buttery. The color should be uniform. When not entirely
cured, the uncured part at the center is usually of a lighter color.

The cheese should contain the proper amount of salt. The most common
defect is in the flavor. If the milk is not free from bad odors and
flavors, these are apt to be more pronounced in the cheese than in the
milk. (For care of milk see Chapter II.) Gas-forming fermentations are
very bad in this variety of cheese as they cannot be controlled and give
the cheese a bad flavor and a "gassy body." When a cheese is gassy, the
sides are most liable to be bulged and the body is full of gas holes or
pockets. Another defect is a sour cheese. This is caused by the
development of too much acid in the milk or during the manufacturing
process. A sour cheese usually cures slowly and has a pronounced sour
taste. The body is hard and bitter.

If the cheese contains too much moisture, it will cure rapidly and the
body will be very soft and pasty. In extreme cases it will be so soft
that it will run when the rind is broken. On the other hand if the
cheese does not contain sufficient moisture, it will cure very slowly
and the body will be hard and dry and sometimes crumbly. There is no
standard score-card for judging Limburger cheese. The Wisconsin
Cheese-makers Association[62] uses the following score-card for
Limburger:

  Flavor     40
  Texture    40
  Color      10
  Salt        5
  Style       5
            ---
    Total   100

+164. Yield and composition of Limburger.+--The yield of cheese depends
on: (1) the amount of fat and other solids in the milk from which it is
made; (2) the amount of moisture incorporated into cheese; (3) the loss
of solids during the manufacturing process.

The yield varies from 12 to 14 pounds of cheese from 100 pounds of milk.
The more fat and other solids in the milk, the more cheese can be made
from 100 pounds of the milk. The more moisture incorporated into the
cheese, the larger the yield. The quality of the cheese and the amount
of solids determine the amount of moisture that can be incorporated into
the cheese. The greater the losses during the manufacturing process, the
less is the yield. The composition of Limburger cheese is affected by
the same factors as the yield. The average cheese probably carries from
40 to 42 per cent of moisture. Limburger cheeses will vary in
composition from this analysis about as follows: water 38 to 44 percent,
protein 21 to 25 percent, fat 25 to 30 percent. The differences in
practice in factory groups are considerable. Certain markets call for
more solid brands, others for the very soft forms.

+165. Münster cheese+ originated in Germany near the city whose name it
bears. There is a limited demand for this variety in America; therefore
it is not extensively made. It is usually manufactured from whole milk
in a Limburger or Brick cheese factory. The process of manufacture is
between that of these two varieties in temperatures used, firmness of
curd and amount of moisture in the curd and cheese. The process is
probably more like that of Limburger. The curd is firmed more in the
whey than for Limburger, and more acid is developed. The cheeses are
pressed or drained in round forms 7 inches in diameter and 6 inches
high. The hoops are lined with cloth to prevent the loss of curd
particles while draining. When the cheeses are sufficiently drained,
until they are firm enough to hold their shape, the cloths are removed.
The cheese is salted by rubbing dry salt on the surface or soaking the
cheese in brine. The product is handled in the curing room very much the
same as Limburger or Brick cheese. When sufficiently ripe, each cheese
is wrapped in parchment paper and placed in a separate wooden box. This
cheese, when cured, has a characteristic flavor which is between that of
Limburger and Brick. The body is more or less open. The essential factor
in the manufacture of Münster cheese is clean milk. Bad fermentations,
such as produce gas and bad flavors, seriously interfere with the
manufacture and sale of the product. The cheese is usually made in the
late fall and winter, when it is difficult to manufacture Limburger.




CHAPTER X

SEMI-HARD CHEESES


Between the quickly perishable soft cheeses and the typical hard group,
are two series of varieties, one ripened by green mold and best known by
Roquefort, the other ripened by bacteria and typified by Brick cheese.
These cheeses are fairly firm, hold their shape well, ripen over a
period varying from a few weeks to several months and their marketable
period is comparatively long. In texture they are intermediate between
the conditions known as "soft" and "hard." In water-content, they range
at their best from 37 to 45 percent. Outside these limits, the cheeses
are often marketable but they lose in quality[63] and trueness to type.

+166. The green mold group.+--There are three well-known semi-hard
cheeses ripened by green or blue-green mold.[64] The mold is an
incidental factor in certain other forms but none of these forms has won
larger than local or purely national recognition. French Roquefort, on
the contrary, is probably the most widely known of all cheeses. Stilton,
to a small degree at least, has followed the English to the many lands
they inhabit. Gorgonzola, although made in Italy alone, has a large
market in other parts of Europe and in America. In the manipulations of
manufacture, these forms are not closely related but they resemble each
other in that each becomes streaked or marbled by the growth of green
mold (_Penicillium Roqueforti_) through open spaces within the cheese.
The "blue-veined" or marbled cheeses have a characteristic taste which
is developed in its most typical form in Roquefort.

+167. Roquefort cheese.+--This is a rennet cheese made from sheep's milk
(with occasional and minor admixture of goat's and cow's milk) in the
section of southern France centering about Roquefort in Aveyron. The
practices are standardized and controlled by a few companies, thus
reaching exceptional uniformity. Roquefort is uncolored, open, made from
firm but brittle or crumbly, not tough or waxy curd. Each cheese is
about 7¼ inches (20 cm.) in diameter and 3¼ inches (9 cm.) in
thickness without a definite rind, and when ripe enough for market is
scraped carefully, closely covered with tin-foil and kept in
refrigerators. The cut cheese shows extensive open spaces which are
lined with green mold. This cheese, in addition to a strong cheesy odor
and taste, has a peppery or burning quality which according to
Currie[65] is due to the formation of volatile fatty acids such as
caproic, caprylic and capric from the butter-fat of the sheep's milk
used. A series for Roquefort cheeses selected for excellent quality was
found by Dox[66] to show the following composition:

  TABLE IV

  COMPOSITION OF ROQUEFORT CHEESE

  =========================================================
                | WATER  | FAT   | PROTEIN | ASH  | SALT
                | PER    | PER   | PER     | PER  | PER
                | CENT   | CENT  | CENT    | CENT | CENT
  --------------+--------+-------+---------+------+--------
    Average     | 38.69  | 32.31 | 21.39   | 6.14 | 4.14
    Minimum     | 37.49  | 31.50 | 19.14   | 5.18 | 3.64
    Maximum     | 40.10  | 33.53 | 23.06   | 6.81 | 4.88
  =========================================================

The composition of the sheep's milk of the Roquefort producing region is
reported by Marre:[67]

  TABLE V

  COMPOSITION OF SHEEP'S MILK

  =============================================================
               | WATER | CASEIN |   FAT    | LACTOSE |  ASH
               |  PER  |  PER   |   PER    |   PER   |  PER
               |  CENT |  CENT  |   CENT   |   CENT  |  CENT
  -------------+-------+--------+----------+---------+---------
    Range      | 76-83 |  5-8   | 5.5-10.5 | 4 to 5  | 0.8-1.2
    Average    | 79.5  |  6.5   |   8.0    |   4.5   |   1.0
  =============================================================

The cheeses when properly made in the local factories are transported to
Roquefort for ripening in the famous caves which have made possible the
development of a great industry.

The Roquefort caves were originally natural openings leading back into
the face of a cliff until they reached a deep, narrow fault or crack in
the rock leading to the plains above. The cooler air from the plains
came down this crack over moist and dripping rocks and issued through
these clefts in a cold moisture-laden current which kept the caves about
50 to 55° F. and moist enough to ripen the cheeses without shrinkage. As
the business outgrew the natural caves, great cellars, some of them five
or six floors deep, were excavated and tunnels were dug back to the
crack so that the strong ventilating current reaches every part of the
cellars and keeps both temperature and relative humidity favorable to
the ripening of the cheeses.

+168. Cow's milk or Façons Roquefort.+--The supply of Roquefort is
automatically limited by the supply of sheep's milk. The sheep gives
milk only about five months in the year and at best a scant average of
about a pint a day to a sheep. Sheep's milk for cheese-making is not
produced, therefore, outside of very limited regions. Some cow's and
goat's milk unavoidably finds its way regularly into the industry
itself. Attempts were naturally made to substitute cow's milk. Outside
the controlled area, factories were established for this purpose. The
quality of the product did not equal that of the Roquefort factories,
and French courts decreed that the name Roquefort should not be used for
such products. Although some local success was obtained, not much
progress was made against the intrenched Roquefort industry. Similar
attempts to make such a product in Germany[68] were tried on an
extensive scale but failed. More recently, under the inspiration of
Conn, the United States Department of Agriculture and the Storrs
Experiment Station have studied the possibilities of such an industry.
Although the work is not completed, the preliminary reports[69] have
indicated the fundamental principles which must underlie such
development.

+169. Outline of making Roquefort.+--Some of the results of these
experiments are summarized in the following paragraphs:

_Milk._--Clean-flavored fresh milk testing 4-4.2 per cent fat and up to
2.8 per cent casein gives the best results. The milk with a high
percentage of cheese-making solids forms a firmer curd, hence works up
better in the process than milk of lower quality.

_Acidity._--The milk is ripened by lactic starter up to an acidity of
0.23 per cent titrated as lactic acid at the time rennet is added. This
gives a firm curd, which drains to the desired water-content but is low
enough to prevent the toughening effect of too high acid. A very slight
increase in initial acid--1 to 2 hundredths per cent--combined with the
rate at which acidity is developing introduces such physical changes in
texture as to make the final texture of Roquefort impossible.

_Temperature._--Rennet is added at or below 84° F. Every degree of heat
adds definitely to the efficiency of rennet. Below 82° F., curdling
becomes slower and the coagulum softer and more difficult to drain. The
sheep's milk curd is made from 76° to 84° F. but sheep's milk has about
twice the cheese solids found in cow's milk. It was found necessary to
raise the temperature as high as texture would permit. However, at 86°
F. the physical character of the curd tends to become tough or waxy in
handling. At 84° F. the curd remains brittle and crumbly. It was,
therefore, necessary to keep the curdling temperature down to 84° F.

_Renneting or setting._--Rennet at a rate of 3 to 4 ounces of standard
liquid rennet to 1000 pounds (10 to 12 c.c. to 100 pounds) was found to
give the best curd under experimental conditions.

_Curdling time._--One and one-half to two hours gave most satisfactory
results in forming curd. This should be very firm and stand until it
begins to "sweat," until beads of whey have begun to collect upon its
surface.

_Cutting._--The cow's milk curd gave best results when cut in two
directions with the half-inch curd knife. The resulting columns, a half
inch square in cross-section, may be handled without excessive losses.

_Draining._--The cut curd is dipped to a draining rack covered with
cloth with as little breaking as possible. During the draining process,
a certain amount of turning is necessary to facilitate the separation
and escape of the whey. If handled too much, losses of fat are increased
and the curd becomes tough or waxy instead of remaining brittle or
crumbly. When properly handled, not over 0.35 per cent of fat is lost.
Under favorable conditions, four-ninths to two-thirds of the original
weight of curd will separate and run off as whey in twenty to thirty
minutes. The curd meanwhile is exposed to the air of the room and cools
toward room temperature. If cooling goes too far, further drainage is
interfered with. Hence the curd is put into the hoop and the drainage
completed while the cheese is reaching its final form.

_Hoop._--Hoops for cow's milk Roquefort must be 7½ inches in diameter
and about 5¾ inches high to hold curd enough to produce a cheese the
size of the standard Roquefort when completely drained. Sheep's milk
with its higher percentage of solids does not require such high hoops.
The curd as it goes into the hoop should be a soft, pulpy mass with no
suggestion of toughness.

_Inoculation with mold._--The mold for Roquefort cheese (_Penicillium
Roqueforti_[70]) is readily grown in pure culture in ordinary loaves of
bread. For this purpose loaves hot from the oven are quickly drenched
with or immersed in hot paraffine to form an impervious crust to retain
moisture as well as to keep out contaminations. It is then allowed to
cool. The interior of each loaf is inoculated by drawing a suspension of
_P. Roqueforti_ spores in water into a sterile pipette (10 c.c.) which
is then thrust through the paraffined crust to the center of the loaf of
bread and allowed to empty there. The hole is sealed up with paraffine.
These loaves are incubated for about a month at room temperature. When
cut, every open space should be found lined with the green spores of the
mold. When dry enough, the mass may be powdered, and put into an
ordinary pepper box. When the curd is ready to go into the hoop, this
mold powder is sprinkled upon it from the pepper box.

_Handling._--Freshly made cheeses are turned within the first hour to
insure the proper smoothness of both sides. Further draining is best
accomplished in a room at about 64° F. with a relative humidity of 85 to
90 per cent. If the surface of the cheese becomes too dry, a rind is
formed. No real rind is permitted on Roquefort. If the temperature is
too high, slime forms quickly and unfavorable fermentation may occur.
Slime (bacteria and _Oidium lactis_ usually) must be scraped when it
becomes too heavy.

_Salting._[71]--Experimental cheeses were found to give the best results
when at the end of about three days' drainage they contained about 50
per cent water. Such cheeses were salted by sprinkling the entire
surface lightly, replaced upon the drain boards for one day, salted
again and piled in two's. After another day they received the third
salting and were piled in three's for two days longer. A total of about
10 per cent by weight of salt was used to secure an absorption of 4 per
cent. At the same time the water-content dropped to 40 to 43 per cent.
After salting is completed, the cheeses are brushed and punched with
holes to permit oxygen to enter.[72] They are then ready for ripening.

+170. Ripening of Roquefort.+--The ripening of experimental Roquefort
has required four to six months at a relative humidity of 85 to 90 per
cent. This relative humidity is just below the equilibrium relative
humidity of the cheese, hence permits a shrinkage of 2 to 4 per cent in
the water-content of the cheese. This makes it possible to control the
amount of surface slime developed.

If the relative humidity goes too high, the surface slime of bacteria
and yeasts becomes very heavy, soft and almost liquid, and follows the
openings into the cheese with resultant damage to appearance and flavor.
Even under the conditions at Roquefort, this slime must be removed by
rubbing or scraping several times to avoid injury to the cheeses,
together with the production of bad odor and taste. If the humidity
becomes too low, the surface becomes dry, hard and cracks open, the
friable crumbly texture is injured, and there is considerable loss in
weight. Salt forms about 4 per cent of the cheese. This is in solution
in the water present, which is about 40 per cent, and makes a brine of
about 10 per cent strength. This strength of brine does not prevent the
growth of the Roquefort mold (_Penicillium Roqueforti_) but does hinder
the development of _Oidium lactis_ in the open spaces within the cheese.
Accurate adjustment of temperature and relative humidity in the ripening
rooms to salt and water-content in the cheese is essential to proper
ripening. These conditions are furnished by the unique natural
conditions of the caves of Roquefort. The production of such cheeses
elsewhere depends either on the discovery of another locality with
closely similar conditions or on the artificial production and control
of the necessary temperature and relative humidity. This has been done
on an experimental basis by the use of cold storage apparatus combined
with proper humidifiers.

The differences between working with sheep's and with cow's milk lie in
the making process rather than in the ripening. Sheep's milk freshly
drawn shows a higher acidity than cow's milk, probably on account of the
acid reaction of its greater casein content. With nearly double the
total solids of cow's milk, the yield to one hundred pounds is much
greater, consequently the drainage of the curd is much more easily
handled.

Once made and salted, the cheeses require very nearly the same
conditions of ripening. The resultant products are alike in appearance
and texture. In flavor, cow's milk Roquefort differs in character from
sheep's milk cheese to such a degree as to be recognized by taste. The
difference was found by Currie[73] to be due to an actual difference in
the combination of fatty acids present.

Although these differences in character are recognizable by the expert
in testing the cheese, as well as by chemical analysis, cow's milk
Roquefort would satisfy that large proportion of consumers who use such
cheese only in connection with other fairly high flavored foods. The
demands for technical skill and factory equipment are not naturally
greater than for many other lines of cheese-making. The gradual
development of a cow's milk Roquefort may be anticipated.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.--Gorgonzola ripening establishment in valley
near Lecco.]

+171. Gorgonzola+[74] is a rennet cheese made from fresh whole cow's
milk, in northern Italy. It takes its name from the village of
Gorgonzola, a few miles from Milan, but the manufacture of the cheese
has spread over a wide area. The cheeses are made on farms and in
factories from which they are transported for ripening to cool valleys
of the Alps, principally near Lecco (Fig. 24). Boeggild introduced the
making of a cheese after the Gorgonzola process into Denmark about 1885.
This industry has been successful on a small scale since that time.
Gorgonzola cheeses are about 30 cm. (12 inches) in diameter and 18 cm.
(7 inches) thick and weigh 15 to 20 pounds. As exported they are usually
heavily coated[75] with a mixture usually barite, tallow and lard
colored with annatto or other cheese color. This coating prevents
shrinkage or mold on the surface of the cheese in transit. When cut
these cheeses vary greatly. All show marbling with mold (Roquefort
mold). During their ripening they become very slimy at the surface. To
open up air spaces for mold growth, this slime is scraped off and holes
are punched into the cheeses. These holes are readily seen in the final
product. Some show crumbly texture, well distributed mold, as in
Roquefort, with flavor approaching that cheese; in others the texture is
waxy rather than crumbly, a condition correlated regularly with
different character in the flavor. Frequently in whole areas or in small
pockets, slime consisting of bacteria and Oidium has followed the
openings into the cheese and affects its odor and taste.

Experimental Gorgonzola cheeses comparable with the Italian product were
made with cow's milk ripened as for Roquefort or higher, to 0.25-0.30
per cent (titrated as lactic acid), curdled at 86° F. (30° C.), cut into
cubes and slightly stirred, then dipped to a draining board for about
one-half hour, and put into the hoop. The cheeses drained quickly to
about 50 percent water and developed a surface rind as in the harder
cheeses. Cut surfaces showed a fairly open cheese in which mold grew
readily. These cheeses were salted to taste, not to a specified
percentage. They ripened with the same irregular results and the
characteristic range of flavors found in Gorgonzola. To avoid the
rotting of the cheese by surface growths, they were exposed to low
humidities for a time and cracks opened at the surfaces, as seen in the
ripening rooms at Lecco (Fig. 24). The texture was more or less waxy or
tough, which was correlated with the slightly higher heat at renneting
together with the stirring or "working" of the curd. Comparative
analyses of a series of imported cheeses confirm the interpretation that
the salt-content of Roquefort, 4 per cent approximately, prevents the
invasion of the interior of the cheese by Oidium. No complete study of
the ripening of Gorgonzola has been made. As far as followed, it
consists in an initial souring process followed by ripening by molds and
slime organisms. At its best, Gorgonzola is nearly equal to Roquefort
but the percentage of such quality is low. In spite of its irregular
quality, England has used larger amounts of Gorgonzola than of
Roquefort. Considerable quantities have been imported for the Italian
trade in the United States.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.--Gorgonzola cheese curing-room.]

+172. Stilton cheese+ bears the name of an English village[76] in which
it was first sold. It is made from cow's milk and is typically a whole
milk cheese, although part skim cheeses are regularly made and sold as
lower grades. In the Stilton-making counties, the milk from Shorthorn
cattle testing about 3.5 to 4.0 per cent fat is preferred to richer or
poorer grades. Such milk is curdled with rennet at about 86° F. in about
one hour; the curd is cut, dipped to a draining table covered with cloth
and drained slowly over a period of several hours, commonly overnight.
During this period considerable acidity is developed. The curd is then
milled or broken by hand, salted, packed into hoops 15 to 16 inches high
and 7 inches in diameter. These hoops are made from heavy tin (Fig. 26)
with four rows of holes about 3/10 inch in diameter. The freshly filled
hoops are allowed to stand and drain without pressure in a room at about
70° F. (Fig. 26). Such cheeses are turned every day for several days.
When solid enough to stand the hoops are removed, the cheeses are
scraped or rubbed with a knife until the surface is smooth, and commonly
wrapped with a cloth bandage to maintain the shape, if the cheese is
still too soft to stand firmly. In the factories, several rooms are used
with varying temperature and relative humidities, which makes it
possible to place each cheese under the condition best suited to its
texture and condition of ripeness. In general, the dairy sections of
England are much more humid than those of America and there are less
violent changes in temperature. Stilton cheese-making has grown up to
take advantage of this climatic factor in handling the product.
Transplantation of such an industry necessitates a mastery not only of
the manipulations but a grasp of the fundamental principles underlying
the process and a readjustment of practices to preserve those
principles.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.--Stilton cheeses in hoops, draining.]

Stilton is, then, a soured curd cheese in whose ripening a very
prominent part is played by the green mold (usually some strain of _P.
Roqueforti_) which grows throughout the cavities of its mass[77]. At
its best, it has attractive texture and flavor. Much of it fails to
reach high quality on account of the invasion of bacteria, _Oidium
lactis_, and very frequently myriads of cheese mites. The following
analysis was furnished as typical for ripe cheese by Miles Benson,[78]
late professor of dairying at Reading, England: Water 31 per cent, fat
36 per cent, casein 29 per cent, mineral constituents including salt
about 4 per cent. Approximately the same figures are given by Primrose
McConnell (Agricultural Note Book). The low percentage of salt is
another factor of uncertainty in the control of this Stilton product, as
in Gorgonzola, since these cheeses are commonly high in water-content at
first and are thus subject to invasion by Oidium.

Stilton has been made on a small scale in Canada[79] and occasionally
attempted in the United States. No serious effort to develop an industry
of commercial importance has been made in America. Comparative study of
the cheeses ripened by green mold tends to the conviction that the
adaptation of the Roquefort practice to the use of cow's milk offers a
more satisfactory basis for experiment than efforts to establish a
Stilton or a Gorgonzola industry.

+173. Gex.+--A cheese under this name made in southern France resembles,
in its general character as a ripened cheese, the English Stilton and
Italian Gorgonzola. Although it has no commercial importance, reference
is made to this cheese to show that mold-ripened cheeses have been
developed entirely independently in different countries to bring about
the same general character of product.

+174. Bacterially ripened series.+--The semi-hard cheeses ripened by
bacteria stand half-way between true Limburger and the hard forms. In
fact, brands of Limburger are readily found which approach the texture
and ripening of Brick cheese. In the same way, Brick cheeses are often
found which have the appearance, texture and much of the flavor of the
Cheddars with only a trace of the taste of Limburger. Port du Salut,
Oka, Münster, in France Livarot, in the Balkan regions Kascoval, belong
in this series.

+175. Brick cheese.+--The name of this cheese is probably due to the
finished product being about the size and shape of a brick. It is
similar to the German cheese Bäckstein and may have been developed from
it. It is typically a sweet-curd cheese, made from milk freshly drawn,
without permitting the development of appreciable quantities of acidity
until after the curd has been put into the hoop. In the making process,
it is intermediate between Limburger and the cheeses of the Cheddar
group. Some cheese-makers use an ordinary cheese vat, others a copper
kettle in manufacturing.

It is the usual practice to deliver the milk to the cheese factory both
morning and evening, without cooling. Cheese is made twice a day. In
some cases the milk is delivered only once a day, and extra precautions
must then be taken to care for the milk properly.

The discussion of the care of milk in Chapter II applies to that for
Brick cheese. For the best quality of cheese, the milk in the vat
should show about 0.15 of 1 per cent acidity and never above 0.18 of 1
per cent.[80]

+176. Making of Brick cheese.+[81]--The milk is received at the cheese
factory at a temperature of about 92° to 96° F. For the best results,
the acidity should be determined (by the acid test) to decide on the
amount of starter to use. Few Brick cheese-makers use an acid test or a
starter but these precautions would improve the product of many
factories. For method of using the acid test, see Chapter V. Chapter IV
discusses the preparation and use of starter. Usually 0.25 to 0.50 of 1
per cent of starter is the amount required. A small amount of starter is
used to aid the development of lactic acid and for the beneficial effect
it has on the flavor. A very small development of acid is desired after
adding the starter; therefore the change in acidity should be very
carefully watched with the acid test. The vat is usually set when the
acid test shows 0.16 of 1 per cent acidity. The more acid in the milk,
the less starter should be employed. Sufficient rennet extract should be
used to give a coagulation suitable for cutting in thirty to thirty-five
minutes. For method of adding the rennet extract, see Chapter V. When
the coagulum is firm enough for the curd to break clean over the finger,
it is ready to cut. The curd is cut with coarse knives into 3/8- or
½-inch cubes. After cutting, the curd is let stand three to five
minutes, then stirred with the hands for a few minutes until the whey
begins to separate and then stirred with the rake. Some makers do not
stir by hand but use the rake directly after cutting. When this is done,
great care must be exercised to stir the curd without breaking up the
pieces, because this causes a loss of fat. After cutting the curd is
stirred for twenty to thirty minutes before the steam is turned on. The
curd is heated very slowly at first and more rapidly during the last
stages of cooking. The curd is cooked to a temperature of 110° to 115°
F. The lower the temperature that can be used to produce firm curd, the
better the texture of the cheese. After cutting and during the cooking,
the curd must be constantly stirred so that lumps will not form. When
the curd forms lumps, the moisture is not evenly expelled. This results
in uneven texture and curing. Sometimes some salt is added to the curd
in the vat to restrain souring. The curd is stirred after cooking until
it is sufficiently firm. It remains usually in the whey for a total
period of one and one-fourth to one and one-half hours from the time of
cutting. It is then dipped into forms 10 inches long by 5 inches wide by
8 inches deep. The forms are without top or bottom and are placed on a
draining table. This table is so constructed that the whey can be saved
for stock feed. When ready to "dip," the whey is drawn down to the
surface of the curd in the vat, then the curd is dipped into the forms
or hoops. Care must be taken to get the same amount of curd into each
form to produce the cheeses of uniform size. Each cheese is turned
several times to insure even draining and even reduction of the
temperature. While draining, a follower is placed in each hoop and a
weight placed on each cheese. Usually a brick is used for this weight. A
cheese is allowed to drain or press for ten to fifteen hours. It is
then placed on the salting table and rubbed with coarse salt. While on
the salting table, a cheese is placed on its broad side. Some
cheese-makers prefer to salt their cheeses by soaking them in a salt
brine. This brine should be strong enough to float an egg. Salting
requires three days. The cheeses are then brushed free from excess salt
and taken to the cellar to cure or ripen.

+177. Ripening Brick cheese.+--For this process, the cellars are kept at
about 90 percent relative humidity and a temperature of 60° to 65° F.
Some prefer a temperature for curing as high as 68° F. During the
curing, the surfaces of the cheese are kept moist and mold growths kept
down by rubbing or brushing the cheese with pure water or salt and
water. In the curing cellars the cheeses are placed on shelves; at first
they are set close together and as they cure, they are separated. During
curing, the color changes from a whitish to a reddish brown. The cheese
cures from the outside toward the center. When first made, the product
is harsh and hard in texture but during the ripening process it becomes
mellow and smooth. The cheeses remain on the curing shelves for four to
six weeks, after which they are wrapped in heavy waxed paper and boxed.
A cheese ready for market usually weighs about five pounds. A Brick
cheese box is 5 inches deep by 20 inches wide by 3 feet long, and holds
110 to 115 pounds of cheese.

+178. Qualities of Brick cheese.+--The cheeses should be neat and
attractive and the rind not cracked or broken. The sides should be
square and not bulged. The cheese should have a clean, characteristic
Brick cheese flavor. The body and texture should be mellow and smooth
and when rubbed between the thumb and forefinger, should break down
like cold butter. The color should be uniform. The cheese should contain
the proper amount of salt and moisture. One of the worst faults with
Brick cheese is bad flavor. This is many times due to the cheese-maker
not using clean flavored starter. It may also be due to bad flavored
milk. A Brick cheese-maker has no means of controlling gassy
fermentations. These show themselves in the bad flavor of the cheese and
in the porous body. They also cause the cheese to bulge. If detected,
gassy milk should be rejected. If too much acid is developed, a sour
cheese is the result. This will not cure normally and usually has a sour
flavor. The body will be brittle and mealy. If too much salt is used,
the cheese may have a salty taste and it will cure very slowly. If not
enough salt is used, the cheese may cure too rapidly and undesirable
flavors and fermentations develop. The cheese must have the proper
moisture-content; if too much moisture is present, the cheese cures too
fast and is soft and pasty in body; if not enough moisture, then the
reverse is true. Tabulation of cheeses of special quality, as submitted
in scoring contests, show an average water-content of 37 to 38 per cent,
with occasional cheeses verging toward Limburger in texture and flavor
with 40 to 42 per cent water, and others indistinguishable from Cheddar,
with water-content as low as 34 per cent.

The Wisconsin Cheese-makers Association uses the following score-card
for the judging of Brick cheese on a scale of 100:

  Flavor      40
  Texture     40
  Color       10
  Salt         5
  Style        5
             ---
             100

+179. Composition and yield.+--The composition of Brick cheese varies
within wide limits. The average cheese probably contains from 37 to 39
per cent of water, although many cheeses are above and below this
average; Doane and Lawson[82] give the fat as 28.86 per cent, proteins
23.8 per cent and total ash 4.20 per cent.

The composition and yield are both affected by: (1) the moisture-content
of the cheese; (2) composition of the milk from which made; and (3)
losses during the manufacturing process. The average yield of Brick
cheese is 11 to 13 pounds to 100 pounds of milk.

+180. Port du Salut cheese.+--The Trappist monks originated this type of
cheese in their monasteries in France. Under the name of their community
Oka, it has been made and sold widely by the Trappist Fathers of Quebec.
In recent years, factories independent of the order have made such
cheese both in America and in Europe.

The following outline of the making process indicates the close
relationship between Port du Salut and Brick cheeses. Whole milk or milk
not over one-fifth skimmed is ripened to medium acidity, then heated to
90° to 95° F. according to season and acidity. Rennet enough is added
(see Chapter V) to curdle in thirty to forty minutes, although some
makers shorten the time to twenty minutes. When formed, the curd is cut
into small cubes and excess of whey is dipped away. The constantly
stirred mass is then heated or cooked to 100° to 105° F. within a period
of ten to twelve minutes or according to some makers twenty to thirty
minutes. It is allowed to stand a few minutes to settle. Most of the
whey is then drawn and the mass is stirred vigorously to prevent fusion
of the curd granules. The curd is ready for the hoop when the particles
are about the size of grains of wheat and do not stick together when
squeezed with the hand. The individual grains of curd should crumble
easily between the fingers. The hot curd is transferred directly to the
hoops without cooling. For this purpose, a hoop is set upon the table
covered with a cloth and the curd dipped into the cloth. The edges of
the cloth are then folded over. In this condition the cheese is
transferred to the press where gradually increasing pressure begins with
3 to 4 pounds and reaches about 70 pounds. To insure proper shape,
cheeses are turned and put into fresh cloths at the end of the first
hour and turned subsequently several times during the pressing period of
about twelve hours.[83]

Port du Salut cheeses are salted by rubbing fine salt on the surface by
hand at the rate of 1.2 to 2 per cent of the weight of the cheese. After
about two days in the salting process, they are put into the ripening
cellars. The cellars are wet, since they reach 90 to 95 per cent
relative humidity at a temperature of about 55° F. After two days in the
cellar, the cheeses are plunged into a tank of saturated brine to which
a trace of cheese color has been added. As they come out of these tanks,
they are yellowish and greasy or slimy. They are returned to the
shelves where they are rubbed every day with a cloth or by hands wet in
brine. After about one week they are again plunged in the brine.
Treatment with brine tends to insure a firm rind. The cheeses are rubbed
more or less regularly with brine through the whole ripening period.

After six weeks, such cheese may be eaten. The cut surface of Port du
Salut is creamy in color, may or may not show small holes. In texture it
is soft enough to spread readily under pressure without losing its shape
in handling. In flavor the cheese is a mild form belonging to the
Limburger group.

Port du Salut cheeses as imported from France usually are firm round
cakes about 1½ inches thick, weighing about 3 pounds.




CHAPTER XI

_THE HARD CHEESES_


The hard cheeses form a great series of groups, whose most prominent
physical character is their firm or hard texture. This is correlated
with comparatively low water-content, which is usually between 30 and 40
per cent. Although certain varieties occasionally test above 40 per cent
water, this deviation is accompanied by quick ripening and rapid
spoilage. These varieties of cheese are staple products with long
marketable periods; therefore they may be handled in large lots,
shipped, carted and stored freely without the losses such treatment
would entail in soft cheese. The retailer frequently buys hard cheese by
the ton, not by the cheese or by the box.

In making, these varieties are characterized as cooked and pressed
cheeses. Although both the heating of a curd and the pressing of a newly
made cheese occur among semi-hard forms, these practices appear in their
most typical forms in the hard cheeses.

The hard cheeses show two types of texture. A cut cheese may appear
smooth, free from holes or with a few angular cracks or seams, or it may
show round holes or "eyes." In the smooth textured forms every effort is
made to prevent gassy fermentations, usually by controlling the
fermentation of the curd in the making process. When "eyes" are present,
the end sought has been a development of a particular form of gassy
fermentation which gives this appearance and brings about the
characteristic ripening texture and flavor.

The hard cheeses have been developed in groups of national varieties.
The best known of these groups are those which may be represented by
English Cheddar, American Factory Cheddar, Danish, the Edam of Holland,
Swiss and Parmesan with many related varieties in Italy and neighboring
countries of southern Europe.

+181. The Danish group.+--The Danish cheeses are related in appearance
and flavor to the English group represented by Cheddar. The demand for
butter in Europe has been so great that the Danish cheese-makers have
developed skim and part skim varieties largely to the exclusion of the
whole milk form. Skillful handling of their process has resulted in a
product which has had a very large and appreciative market in England
and Germany.

+182. The Dutch group.+--Edam and Gouda are the two forms of cheese made
in Holland and most widely known among other peoples. Both reach America
in considerable quantities; both are shipped in large amounts to
tropical countries. Although attempts have been made to manufacture them
in America, no commercial production of these cheeses has been
successful. Although whole milk grades of these cheeses are known, they
are to a large measure part skim in manufacture. The presence of one or
both of these forms in every large market in America makes the general
facts of their production of general interest. Parts of a report on
experimental work in the making of Edam and Gouda are, therefore, given
here.

+183. Edam cheese+[84] is a sweet-curd type, made from partially
skimmed-milk. It comes to the market in the form of round red balls,
each weighing from 3½ to 4 pounds when cured. It is largely
manufactured in northern Holland and derives its name from a town famous
as a market for this kind of cheese.[85] Milk from which one-fourth to
one-third of the fat has been removed is used. Too great pains cannot be
taken in regard to the condition of the milk. It should be fresh, free
from every trace of taint; in brief, it should be in as perfect
condition as possible.

+184. Method of manufacture.+--The following paragraphs give the steps
in the manufacture of Edam cheese:

_Treatment of milk before adding rennet._--The temperature of the milk
should be brought up to a point not below 85° F. nor much above 88° F.
When the desired temperature has become constant, the coloring matter
should be added. Cheese color is used at the rate of 1½ to 2 ounces
for 1000 pounds of milk. The coloring matter should, of course, be added
to the milk and thoroughly incorporated by stirring before the rennet is
added.

_Addition of rennet to milk._--The rennet should not be added until the
milk has reached the desired temperature (85° to 88° F.) and this
temperature has become constant.

When the temperature reaches the desired point and remains there
stationary, the rennet extract is added. Rennet extract may be used,
4½ to 5½ ounces being taken for 1000 pounds of milk, or enough to
coagulate the milk in the desired time, at the actual temperature used.
The milk should be completely coagulated, ready for cutting, in about
twelve to eighteen minutes from the time the rennet is added. The same
precaution observed in making Cheddar cheese should be followed in
making Edam cheese with reference to care in adding the rennet, such as
careful, accurate measurement, dilution with pure water before addition
to milk.

_Cutting the curd for Edam._--When the curd breaks clean across the
finger, it should be cut; it is cut a very little softer than in the
Cheddar process as ordinarily practiced. As stated, this stage of
hardness in the curd which fits it for cutting should come in twelve to
eighteen minutes after the rennet is added. First, a vertical knife is
used and the curd is cut lengthwise, after which it is allowed to stand
until the slices of curd begin to show the separation of whey. Then the
vertical knife is used in cutting crosswise, after which the horizontal
knife is at once used. Any curd adhering to the bottom and sides of the
vat is carefully removed by the hand, after which the curd-knife is
again passed through the mass of curd lengthwise and crosswise,
continuing the cutting until the curd has been cut as uniformly as
possible into very small pieces.

_Treatment of Edam curd after cutting._--When the cutting is completed,
one commences at once to heat the curd up to the temperature of 93° to
96° F. The heating is done as quickly as possible. While the heating is
in progress, the curd is kept constantly agitated to prevent settling
and consequent overheating. As soon as the curd shows signs of
hardening, which the experience of the worker will enable him to
determine, the whey is drawn off until the upper surface of the curd
appears, when one should commence to fill the press molds.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Edam cheese mold.]

_Filling molds, pressing and dressing Edam._--The molds, which are
described later in detail, are well soaked in warm water previous to
use, in order to prevent too sudden chilling of curd and consequent
checking of separation of whey. As soon as whey is drawn off, as
indicated above, one begins to fill the pressing molds (Fig. 27). The
filling should be done as rapidly as possible to prevent too great
cooling of curd. When the curd has been put into the molds, its
temperature should not be below 88° F. Unless care is taken to keep the
curd covered, the portion that is last put into the molds may become too
much cooled. In making Edam cheese on a small scale, it is a good plan
to squeeze the moisture out with the hands as much as possible and then
break it up again before putting in the molds, when the curd should be
pressed into the mold firmly by the hands. The molds should be filled as
nearly alike as possible. The cheese should weigh from 5 to 5¼ pounds
each when ready for the press. When the filling of molds is completed,
they are put under continual pressure of 20 to 25 pounds for about
twenty-five or thirty minutes. While the cheese is being pressed, some
sweet whey is heated to a temperature of 125° or 130° F., and this whey
should not be allowed to go below 120° F. at any time while it is being
used. When the cheeses are taken from their molds, each is put into the
warm whey for two minutes, then removed and dressed. For dressing Edam
cheese, the ordinary cheese bandage cloth is used. This is cut into
strips, which should be long enough to reach entirely around the cheese
and overlap an inch or so, and which should be wide enough to cover all
but a small portion of the ends of the cheese when put in place. Before
putting on the bandage, all rough projections should be carefully pared
from the cheese. In putting on, the cheese is held in one hand and the
bandage is wrapped carefully around the cheese, so that the whole is
covered, except a small portion on the upper and lower surface of the
cheese. These bare spots are covered by small pieces of bandage cloth of
a size sufficient to fill the bare surface. The bandage is kept wet with
the warm sweet whey, thus facilitating the process of dressing. After
each cheese is dressed, it should be replaced in the dressing mold, care
being taken that the bandage remains in place and leaves no portion of
the surface of the cheese uncovered and in direct contact with the mold.
The cheese is then put under continual pressure of 60 to 120 pounds and
kept for six to twelve hours.

+185. Salting and curing Edam.+--There are two methods which may be
employed in salting,--dry and wet. In dry-salting, when the cheese is
finally taken from the press, it is removed from the press mold, its
bandage is removed completely, and the cheese placed in another mold,
quite similar, known as the salting mold. Each cheese is placed in a
salting mold with a coating of fine salt completely surrounding it. The
cheese is salted in this way once each day for five or six days. Each
day the cheese should be turned when it is replaced in the mold, so that
it will not be rounded on one end more than the other.

In the method of wet-salting, the cheese is placed in a tank of salt
brine, made by dissolving common salt in water in the proportion of
about 1 pound of salt to 2½ quarts of water. Each cheese is turned
once a day and should be left in the brine seven or eight days. When
the cheese is taken from the salting mold or salt bath, it is placed in
warm water and given a vigorous, thorough brushing in order to remove
all slimy or greasy substances that may have accumulated on the outer
surface. When the surface is well cleansed, the cheese is carefully
wiped dry with a linen towel and placed upon a shelf in the curing-room.
In being put on the shelves, the cheeses should be placed in contact so
as to support one another, until they have flattened out at both ends so
much that they can stand upright alone. Then they are moved far enough
apart to allow a little air space between them. Another method of
securing the flattened ends is to support each cheese on opposite sides
by wedge-shaped pieces of wood. After being placed on the shelves in the
curing-room, they are turned once a day and rubbed with the bare hand
during the first month, twice a week during the second month and once a
week after that. When any slimy substance appears on the surface of the
cheese, it should be washed off at once with warm water or sweet whey.
The special conditions of the curing-room will be noticed in detail
below. When the cheeses are about two months old, they can be prepared
for market in the following manner: They are first made smooth on the
surface by being turned in a lathe or in some other manner, after which
the surface is colored. For coloring, some carmine is dissolved in
alcohol or ammonia to secure the proper shade, and in this color-bath
the cheeses are placed for about one minute, when they are removed and
allowed to drain, and as soon as they are dry the outside of each cheese
is rubbed with boiled linseed oil, in order to prevent checking. They
are then wrapped in tin-foil, which is done very much like the
bandaging. Care must be taken to put on the tin-foil so that it presents
a smooth, neat appearance. The cheeses are finally packed in boxes,
containing twelve cheeses in each box, arranged in two layers of six
each with a separate partition for each cheese.

+186. Equipment for making Edam cheese.+--Careful attention must be
given to the moisture and temperature of the curing-room. This room
should be well ventilated, quite moist and its temperature kept between
50° and 65° F. These are conditions not easy to secure in any ordinary
room. Some form of cellar is best adapted for these conditions. The
amount of moisture can be determined by an instrument known as a
hygrometer. In a curing-room suited for Edam cheese, the moisture should
be between 85 and 95 per cent, or a little short of saturation. When the
temperature is between 50° and 65° F., the moisture is between 85 and 95
per cent if the wet-bulb thermometer is from 1 to 2° F. (or ½ to 1°
C.) below the dry-bulb thermometer. Cheese will check or crack and be
spoiled for market, if the degree of moisture is not kept high enough.

Aside from the molds, press and salting vat, the same apparatus that is
used in making Cheddar can be used for Edam cheese. The pressing mold is
turned preferably from white wood or, in any case, from wood that will
not taint. Each mold consists of two parts; the lower constitutes the
main part of the mold, the upper portion is simply a cover. The lower
portion or body of the mold has several holes in the bottom, from which
the whey flows when the cheese is pressed. Care must be taken to prevent
these holes being stopped up by curd. This part of the mold is about six
inches deep and six inches in diameter across the top. The salting mold
has no cover and the bottom is provided with only one hole for the
out-flow of whey; in other respects it is much like the pressing mold.

+187. Qualities and yield of Edam cheese.+--The flavor of a perfect Edam
cheese is difficult to describe. It is mild, clean, and pleasantly
saline. In imperfect Edams, the flavor is more or less sour and
offensive. In body, a perfect Edam cheese is solid, rather dry and mealy
or crumbly. In texture, it should be close and free from pores. In the
experiments here reported the amount of fat in 100 pounds of the
partially skimmed-milk varied from 2.45 to 3.20 pounds and averaged 2.77
pounds. Of this amount, from 0.30 to 0.51 pound of fat was lost in the
whey, with an average of 0.39 pound. The yield of cheese from 100 pounds
of milk varied from 9.60 to 11.82 pounds and averaged 10.56 pounds.

+188. Gouda cheese.+[86]--This Dutch variety is a sweet-curd cheese made
from whole milk. In shape, the Gouda cheese is somewhat like a Cheddar
with the sharp edges rounded off and sloping toward the outer
circumference at the middle from the end faces. They usually weigh 10 or
12 pounds, though they vary in weight from 8 to 16 pounds. They are
largely manufactured in southern Holland, and derive their name from the
town in which they were first made. Fresh sweet milk that has been
produced and cared for in the best possible manner should be used.

+189. Method of manufacture.+--The processes of manufacturing Gouda
cheese are as follows:

_Treatment of milk before adding rennet._--The temperature of the milk
should be brought up to a point not below 88° F. nor much above 90° F.
When the desired temperature has been reached and has become constant,
the coloring matter is added. One ounce of cheese color for about 1200
pounds of milk may be used. The coloring matter should be thoroughly
incorporated by stirring before the rennet is added.

_Addition of rennet to milk._--The rennet should not be added until the
milk has reached the desired temperature (88 to 90° F.) and this
temperature has become constant. The milk should be completely
coagulated, ready for cutting, in fifteen or twenty minutes. The same
precautions should be used in adding rennet as those previously
mentioned in connection with the manufacture of Edam cheese.

_Cutting the curd._--The curd should be cut when it is of about the
hardness generally observed for cutting in the Cheddar process. The
cutting is done as in the Cheddar process except that the curd is cut a
little finer in the Gouda cheese. Curd should be about the size of peas
or wheat kernels when ready for press and as uniform in size as
possible.

_Treatment of curd after cutting._--After the cutting is completed,
heating and stirring is begun at once. The heating and constant stirring
is continued until the curd reaches a temperature of 104° F., which
should require from thirty to forty minutes. When the curd becomes
rubber-like in feeling, the whey should be run off. The whey should be
entirely sweet when it is removed.

_Pressing and dressing Gouda._--After the whey is off, the curd is put
in molds at once without salting (Fig. 28). Pains should be taken in
this process to keep the temperature of the curd as near 100° F. as
possible. Each cheese is placed under continuous pressure amounting to
ten or twenty times its own weight and kept for about half an hour. The
first bandage is put on in very much the same manner as in Edam cheese
making. The cheese is then put in press again for about one hour. The
first bandage is then taken off and a second one like the first put on
with great care, taking pains to make the bandage smooth, capping the
ends as before. The cheese is then put in press again and left twelve
hours or more.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Gouda cheese mold.]

_Salting and curing._--When Gouda cheese is taken from the press, the
bandage is removed and it is placed for twenty-four hours in a
curing-room like that used for Edam cheese, as previously described.
Each cheese is then rubbed all over with dry salt until the salt begins
to dissolve, and this same treatment is continued twice a day for ten
days. At the end of that time, each cheese is carefully and thoroughly
washed in warm water and dried with a clean linen towel. The cheeses are
then placed on the shelves of the curing-room, turned once a day and
rubbed. The temperature and moisture are controlled as described in the
curing process of Edam cheese. If the outer surfaces of the cheese
become slimy at any time, they are carefully washed in warm water and
dried with clean towels. Under these conditions, cheese ripens in two or
three months.

+190. Equipment for Gouda cheese.+--The molds, press and curing-room
are the only equipment needed in the making of Gouda cheese that differ
from that employed in making Cheddar cheese. The mold used for Gouda
cheese consists of two portions, which are shown separately in Fig. 28.
These molds are made of heavy pressed tin. The inside diameter at the
middle is about 10 inches, that of the ends about 6½ inches. The
height of the mold is about 5½ inches, and this represents the
thickness of the cheese, but by pushing the upper down into the lower
portion, the thickness can be decreased as desired.

+191. Composition and yield of Gouda.+--In work with milk averaging 4.2
per cent of fat there were lost in the whey from 0.29 to 0.43 per cent
with an average of 0.35 per cent of fat. The loss of fat appears to be
not much greater than the average loss met with in cheese factories in
making Cheddar cheese. From 100 pounds of milk, there were made from
11.60 to 13.35 pounds of green cheese, with an average of 12.50 pounds.
The percentage of water in the experimental cheese varied from 41.25 to
45.43 per cent and averaged 43.50 per cent.




CHAPTER XII

_CHEDDAR CHEESE-MAKING_


Cheddar is the best known cheese throughout the United States and the
one most commonly made in factories. The Cheddar process was brought to
America by English immigrants. Similar to Cheddar cheese are Pineapple,
English Dairy, Sage cheese, skimmed-milk and California Jack cheese made
in this country, and Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Wensleydale and
Cheshire made in England. The Cheddar cheese process as employed in the
factories to-day has been modified and improved since it was first
introduced into this country by the early immigrants. The following
description[87] includes only the practices as found in the factories
to-day if whole milk is used. Skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese is discussed
later.

+192. The lot-card.+--The Cheddar process involves several hours of
manipulation and includes many details which should be closely and
accurately observed and recorded. The necessity of carrying observations
of several different factors at the same time makes a scheme of
recording data essential to convenient work. For this purpose, a
lot-card for Cheddar cheese is introduced here and the pages given to
particular factors are indicated in the space intended for the recording
of observations. The manufacture of Cheddar cheese is a complicated
process, because several factors must be given attention at the same
time. A careful record of the observations of each step in the
successive handling of each lot of milk puts the operator in possession
of a permanent record of his experience. This record has several uses.
It may help to convince patrons of the importance of eliminating faults
in the milk; it furnishes the cheese-maker a cumulative record of his
experiences in handling milk with special qualities, such as high or low
fat-content, over-acidity or taints. Since Cheddar ripening covers a
period of weeks and months, no operator can remember particular lots of
milk sufficiently well to be able to use his experience on the
interpretation of the qualities found in the ripened product.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Delivering milk to the cheese factory.]

+193. The milk.+--It is the usual practice to deliver the milk to the
cheese factory each morning (Fig. 29). The night's milk is cooled and
kept clean and cold until delivered at the factory. It is advisable not
to mix the cold night's milk and the warm morning's milk, but to deliver
them in separate cans to the cheese factory at the same time. The milk
is weighed, sample for fat test taken and then run into the vat (Fig.
30). The receiving or taking in of the milk is one of the most important
parts of the cheese factory work. It is practically as important as the
actual manufacturing of the cheese.

  +21 CHEESE.+ This card must remain with lot ........... from the milk room
  until the finished product is ready to leave the building, then it should
  be handed to instructor.

  +MAKING+ Day and Date ................................ Vat ...............
  +Milk                   |            |
  Used+                   |            |                   +Milk+
  ........................|............| Appearance of Milk ................
  ........................|............| Odor ..............................
  ........................|............| Taste .............................
             Total pounds |............| Weather conditions ................
  ------------------------+------------+------------------------------------
  ...........% fat ...........lbs. fat |                 +Starter+
                                       | Kind used..........................
  ....% solids not fat ....lbs. s.n.f. | Flavor.............................
                                       | Acidity............................
  ....% casein        ....lbs. casein. | Amount used.......... % used.......
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------------
  +Time of       Minutes+ |       +% Acid+           |     +Temperature+
  adding starter  }...... |        _In Milk_         | of milk when received
                  }       |                          | when starter added...
  adding rennet   }...... | when received............| when rennet added....
                  }       | before adding starter....| when whey removed....
  coagulation     }...... | after adding starter.....| at pressing..........
                  }       | when rennet added........+----------------------
  cutting         }...... |                          |  +Rennet Test+
                  }       |                          | when milk received...
  turn'g on steam }...... |    _In Whey_             | after adding starter.
                  }       | after curd is cut....... | when rennet added....
  turn'g off steam}...... | at dipping.............. +----------------------
                  }       | at packing.............. | +Hot Iron Test+
  dipping         }...... | at milling               | at dipping...........
                  }       | at milling               | at packing...........
  packing         }...... | at salting               | at salting...........
                  }       +--------------------------+----------------------
  milling         }...... |           +Condition of Curd+
                  }       |
  salting         }...... | when cut........................................
                  }       | when packed.....................................
  hooping         }...... | when milled.....................................
                  }       | when salted.....................................
  pressing        }...... | when pressed....................................
                  }       +-------------------------------------------------
  dressing        }...... | Amount per        | +Color+ | +Rennet+ | +Salt+
                          | 1000 lbs. milk    |.........|..........|........
  Total time from    }....|                   |         |          |
  setting to pressing}    | Total Amount      |.........|..........|........
  ------------------------+-------+-----------+---------+----------+--------
  % fat in    lbs. fat estimated  | If comments are added on
  .......whey  ....... so lost.   | reverse side, put cross here............
                 % of total milk  | Work and
            ....fat lost in whey  | Observations by.........................
  Assisted by...............................................................
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  +YIELD+ Day and Date.........................  Time.......................
                                                               Serial
  Weight of cheese when removed from press to curing room,......lbs.  No....
            lbs. milk for         Kind of cheese made        lbs. cheese per
  ..........one lb. cheese.       ...................    ......100 lbs. milk
            lbs. cheese for one   No. of cheese made.    lbs. cheese for one
  ..........lb. fat in milk.      ...................    ....lb. total solid
             If comments are added on reverse side put cross here...........
  Work and observations by..................................................
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Arranged by W. W. Hall.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Receiving, sampling, weighing and running the
milk into the cheese vat.]

Any milk high in acid or with a bad flavor should be avoided. It is
often bad policy to reject the milk, for a neighboring factory will
accept it and the factory not only loses the milk but also the patron.
Factories should have an agreement to prevent this. The acidity can be
determined by the acid test, but the detection of flavors must be made
by the cheese-maker himself with the aid of smell and taste. Many of
the bad flavors in the cheese can be traced to the poor quality of the
milk. One of the worst qualities in milk and cheese is the presence of
gas-producing organisms.[88] Any milk which shows gassy fermentation
should be rejected, for it is difficult to make cheese from this and at
best there will be a large loss during the manufacturing process. The
cheese may have a bad flavor and develop "pin-holes" and in extreme
cases may puff up like a ball. The person receiving the milk should talk
to the farmers or dairy-men about the proper care of the utensils and
milk. He must see that the cans are kept clean. One very bad practice is
to deliver milk and take home whey in the same cans. The cans, as they
are brought back from the cheese factory full of whey, are often left in
the barn or near a hog-pen until the whey is fed. Unless such cans are
emptied immediately on returning to the farm and then rinsed out with
cold water, thoroughly washed and scalded, bad flavors may develop in
the cheese. It is thought that this causes "fruity" or sweet flavor,
which resembles that of fruits such as raspberries, strawberries or
pineapples.

+194. Ripening the milk.+--A slight development of acidity is required:
(_a_) to obtain the formation of a firm curd; and (_b_) to establish
immediate dominance of a desirable type of lactic organism which will
produce the large amount of acid required later in the cheddaring
process. The development of this acidification before the addition of
rennet is known as the ripening of the milk. The extent of ripening
advised by different schools of makers has varied from an acidity of
0.20 of 1 per cent or even slightly higher percentage titrated as lactic
acid, to about 0.17 of 1 per cent as now preferred by some of the most
successful groups of workers. The ripeness of the milk can also be
determined by the use of the rennet test.

The milk may be ripened by allowing the lactic organisms already present
in the milk to develop naturally. This requires considerable time and
while the lactic acid-forming bacteria are developing, other and
undesirable fermentations may be taking place, so that the good results
which should follow the uninterrupted development of the lactic
acid-forming organisms are lost. Starter is commonly used to produce the
desired ripening of the milk. (For the preparation of starter see
Chapter IV.)

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Steel cheese vat.]

Some makers put the starter into the empty vat (Fig. 31) and add the
milk as it is received; others add it to the total volume of cold milk
and then begin to heat it. Whenever the starter is used, it should be
strained to remove lumps. These lumps might cause a mottled color in the
cheese. The best practice calls for an acidity or a rennet test of the
mixed milk after it has been brought to the setting temperature in the
vat. With milk tested at this stage and the volume of milk in the vat
known, the cheese-maker is able to calculate closely the amount of
starter needed. When the quantity of starter to use is in doubt, the
amount added should be under rather than over the estimate, since the
need of more can be determined by making frequent rennet and acid tests
in a very few minutes without damage to the cheese. If too much starter
has been used, acid or sour cheese is usually obtained, with loss in
market quality.

An over-development of acidity at any stage of the manufacturing process
affects the flavor, body and texture, color and finish of the cheese.
The product is known as a sour cheese, and can usually be identified by
its sour taste and smell. A sour cheese while curing will seldom develop
a normal Cheddar flavor and the texture will be hard and harsh and very
brittle. The body will not be smooth but harsh and grainy. The
over-development of acid will show by fading or bleaching the color. A
sour cheese usually leaks whey for a few days after being placed on the
curing-room shelves.

Ripening the milk is one of the most important parts of cheese-making.
Proper ripening places the acid fermentations under the control of the
cheese-maker so that he may know what results will follow his labors.
The operator can control the acidity while ripening the milk, but after
the rennet is added all control of the acidity is lost. From that time,
the moisture must be regulated in proportion to the acidity.

Before setting, the milk should be ripened to such a point as to leave
at least two and one-half hours from the time that the rennet extract is
added until the acid development has reached the stage at which it is
necessary to remove the whey. By the acid test the milk may vary from
0.16 to 0.18 of 1 per cent, but no definite statement can be given for
the rennet test. This can be determined only by comparison from day to
day. For operation of rennet test see Chapter V. During this period of
two and one-half hours, the curd is formed, then cut, and the
temperature is raised from 84° or 86° F. (the temperature at which the
rennet extract is added) to about 98° to 100° F. The curd must be kept
agitated so that the particles will not mat together; this is necessary
to obtain sufficient contraction of the particles of curd with the
proper reduction of water-content. If the milk becomes too ripe (too
sour) before the rennet is added, there will not be sufficient time for
these steps to take place naturally. In such cases special means are
required to firm the curd. These result in a loss of both quality and
quantity of cheese. On the other hand, if the milk is not ripened, but
the rennet extract added, regardless of the acid development, one of the
important natural forces for expelling the moisture is lost. The time
required for the particles of curd to contract is much prolonged, the
expulsion of whey is usually inadequate and the curd remains in a soft
or wet condition. Using too much starter is almost equally bad, for
although it hastens the making process, it produces a sour or acid
cheese.

+195. Setting or coagulating.+--The milk for Cheddar cheese-making is
heated to 86° to 88° F. or occasionally a slightly lower temperature.
This temperature is found by experiment to give the texture of curd most
favorable for the desired results. Although some cheese-makers work as
low as 84° F., the texture of such curd is too soft and coagulates too
slowly. The very slight change of 2° F. produces curd which coagulates
more quickly and is tougher and firmer.

If the cheeses are to be colored, the color should be added after all
the starter. It should be thoroughly and evenly mixed with the milk to
insure an even color in the cheese. If the color is added before the
starter, there are likely to be white specks in the cheese, on account
of the coagulated casein in the starter. The amount of color to use
depends on the tint desired in the cheese. It varies from 1/3 to ½
ounce to 1000 pounds of milk for a light straw color to 1½ to 2
ounces for 1000 pounds of milk for a deep red color.

Enough rennet should be used to produce a curd firm enough to cut in
twenty-five to thirty-five minutes. The necessary amount will vary with
the strength of the rennet extract itself, with the acidity, the
temperature, the nature of the lot of milk, and with the individual aims
of the maker in which he adjusts the other factors to his preferences as
to rapidity of rennet action. With the usual commercial extract, the
needed amount ranges from 2.5 to 4 ounces for 1000 pounds of milk. As
for all varieties of cheese, the rennet extract should be diluted in
cold water at about one part rennet to forty parts water and thoroughly
stirred into the milk. (See Chapter V.)

+196. Cutting.+--The object of cutting is to obtain an even expulsion of
the moisture from the curd. The curd is cut as soon as it becomes firm
enough. To determine this, various tests may be used. Some operators
test it by pressing it away from the side of the vat, considering it
ready to cut when it separates cleanly from the metal. The test most
commonly used is to insert the index finger obliquely into the curd,
then to start to split the curd with the thumb and finally to raise the
finger gently; if ready to cut, the curd will split cleanly over the
finger and clear whey will separate to fill the opened crack. Another
arbitrary but more or less satisfactory rule is that the time from
adding the rennet until cutting should be two and one-half times that
from the addition of rennet until the first sign of coagulation is
observed.

The condition of the curd itself is the best guide to show when it is
ready to cut. The condition of the curd is constantly changing, so that
in a large vat, if the cutting is not begun until the curd is in the
best condition, by the time the last of the curd is cut it will be too
hard or firm. It is better to begin while the curd is a trifle too soft
so that the cutting will be taking place while the curd is at the proper
stage. At best the last of the curd may become too hard. If too hard, it
will break ahead of the knife instead of cut. Breaking causes more fat
loss than cutting because there is more surface exposed and hence more
fat globules. The softer the curd when cut, the quicker and easier the
moisture can be expelled.

If the curd is cut when soft, care must be exercised not to stir it too
hard immediately after cutting. Soft curd breaks very easily. When the
curd is cut soft and then stirred vigorously, there is a larger loss of
fat than when the curd becomes hard before it is cut.

Two knives are used to cut the curd. (See Fig. 11.) These knives may
have either wire or blades for cutting. The space between the wires or
blades varies from 5/16 to ½ inch. Knives used should have blades or
wires close enough together to cut the pieces as small as desired,
without a second cutting. When the curd has to be cut a second time it
usually results in pieces of uneven sizes, because the pieces already
cut cannot be evenly split in two.

One set of knives has horizontal and the other perpendicular blades or
wires. The curd is cut the long way of the vat with the horizontal knife
and lengthwise and crosswise with the perpendicular knife so that the
result is small cubes or oblongs of curd. Some cheese-makers prefer to
use one knife first and some the other, but the result should be a curd
cut into pieces of uniform size. The smaller the particles of curd or
cubes are cut, the quicker the curd will firm up or cook. If not cut
uniformly, the changes taking place later in the curd particles will not
be uniform,--the small pieces will be hard and dry while the large ones
will be soft and mushy.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--The proper way to put the knife into the curd.]

Care should be taken to let the knife cut its way into the curd (Fig.
32). If the knife is pushed into the curd, it will break it and cause a
large loss of fat. The same is true when taking the knives out of the
curd. The loss of fat due to cutting is very similar to the loss of
sawdust when sawing a board. It may be considered a necessary evil. The
loss due to cutting is about 0.3 of 1 per cent of fat in the whey and
the loss of casein about 0.1 of 1 per cent in the whey.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Acme curd rake.]

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--McPherson curd agitator.]

+197. Heating or "cooking" the curd.+--After the curd is cut, the pieces
(cubes) rapidly settle to the bottom of the vat and tend to mat
together. To prevent this, the curd must be kept stirred. When stirring
first begins, the curd is soft and very readily broken. Some
cheese-makers prefer to stir by hand for the first few minutes after
cutting, while the curd is soft. The importance of careful handling can
hardly be over-emphasized. No matter how well the curd has been cut, if
the stirring is performed in a careless manner in the early stages, it
will be broken into uneven sized pieces and a considerable loss of fat
will result. A wooden hay rake or a McPherson curd agitator (Figs. 33,
34) may be used to stir the curd. Mechanical curd agitators are used in
some cheese factories. There are several makes. (See Fig. 35.) These
agitators save much hand labor, although some stirring by hand must be
done in connection with them. The mechanical agitators do not stir the
curd in the corners of the vat; this must be done with the hand rake. It
is the usual practice to stir the curd immediately after cutting for
five to ten minutes before the mechanical agitators are used. This is
necessary to give the curd a slight chance to firm as the mechanical
agitators tend to break it up. After cutting, a thin film forms on each
piece of curd. This film holds the curd particles, especially the fat.
Breaking the films on the cubes causes loss of fat. If lumps form at
the early stage, by matting of the curd particles, violent stirring is
required to separate them. When such lumps are broken up, new cleavage
lines are formed with loss of fat, because the original films
surrounding the soft curd fuse so firmly that the curd cubes do not
separate but actually break. New surfaces are thus formed with
consequent fat loss. Rapid shrinkage with expulsion of whey takes place
during the first few minutes of gentle agitation. Before any heat is
applied to the vat, sufficient whey should have separated or formed to
float each piece of curd separately. This will require ten to fifteen
minutes from the time of cutting.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--Two types of mechanical curd agitators.]

Thus far the first of three distinct factors which expel the moisture
from the curd has been considered: (1) the action of the rennet; (2) the
development of the lactic acid; and (3) the application of heat. These
forces must have time to act naturally. If heat is applied too soon
after the curd is cut or if the temperature is raised too rapidly, it
causes a thick film to form on the pieces of curd which interferes with
the escape of the whey. The outside of the curd becomes firm but the
inside remains very soft. A curd which is cooked on the outside only
feels firm when stirred by hand in the whey, but when a handful is
squeezed the soft centers are noticed. To firm such curd masses requires
violent stirring, which will break the thick tough film. This allows the
moisture to escape and also increases the fat loss. The rapidity of
heating should depend on the condition of the curd and the amount of
acid developed. The heat should keep pace with these. When ready to
raise the temperature, the least amount of steam possible should be
allowed to pass through the valve. This should raise the temperature
very gradually. If heat is applied too quickly at first, it will cause
the curd to lump. A safe rule is to raise the temperature one degree in
the first five minutes after the steam has been turned on. The heating
should progress slowly until the whole mass of curd in the vat has
reached a temperature of 90° to 92° F. The usual temperature to which
the curd is heated or cooked is 98° F. to 100° F. The lower the
temperature that can be used and properly firm the curd, the better will
be the body of the cheese. If the curd is heated too high, it will
become hard, which causes a dry hard "corky" cheese. After this
temperature has been reached, there is not such a tendency for the curd
particles to stick together nor are they so easily broken in stirring.
It should require, under normal conditions, not less than thirty to
forty-five minutes, from the time the steam is turned on, to raise
temperature of the curd from the setting temperature to that necessary
to "firm" the curd. If a shorter time is allowed to raise the
temperature, the curd will not have opportunity to contract naturally.

The temperature required to expel the moisture properly varies with the
percentage of fat in the milk. If rich in fat (4.5 to 5.5 per cent) milk
requires a temperature of 98° to 104° F. to firm the curd, while the
same result can be accomplished with milk testing 3.0 to 3.5 per cent
fat at a temperature of 94° to 96° F. A higher temperature is needed in
winter than in summer because the milk is usually richer in fat. In a
water-jacketed vat, allowance must always be made for the rise in
temperature due to the water surrounding it. The water may be removed if
there is danger of the temperature going too high. However, it is better
to gauge the heat so that the water may be left, as this helps to hold
the curd at an even temperature, especially in cold weather. In a
steam-heated vat there is not so much danger of the temperature running
up.

The stirring must be kept up after the steam has been turned off until
the curd has reached such a stage of contraction that it will not
readily pack or mat in the bottom of the vat. After the curd reaches
this stage it may be allowed to settle to the bottom and stirred only
occasionally until it is time to remove the whey. If the cheese room is
not warm and there is danger of the curd cooling, a cover should be
placed on the vat. The curd should not be allowed to settle for more
than fifteen minutes without stirring to keep each piece separate. This
is necessary to obtain uniform contraction of all curd masses.

+198. Removing the whey.+--To permit the normal changes in the curd to
take place naturally, two and one-half hours from the time the rennet
extract is added is ordinarily required before the whey is drawn. The
time of removing the whey is determined by two factors: one, the acid
development, and the other, the firmness of the curd. For the best
results, it is better to have the firmness of the curd a trifle ahead of
the acid development. When the proper acid development has been reached,
the whey must be removed, regardless of the firmness of the curd. If the
curd has not become firm enough by natural forces, when the acid
development has reached the proper stage to remove the whey, it must be
firmed by other means. If it is not firm enough, either by natural or
artificial means, when the whey is removed, a sour cheese is the result.
The acid development should not be allowed to go beyond 0.16 to 0.19 of
1 per cent acidity in the whey by the acid test or 1/16 to 1/8 of an
inch of acid on the hot-iron test, before the whey is removed.

+199. Hot-iron test.+[89]--This test is employed to determine the amount
of acid in the curd. A piece of iron, such as an iron pipe two feet
long, is heated in the fire to proper temperature. If the iron is too
hot it will burn the curd, and if not hot enough the curd will not stick
to the iron. When hot, it is taken from the fire and wiped clean with a
cloth. A handful of curd is taken from the vat and squeezed dry, either
in the hand or in a cloth. This curd is carefully pressed against the
hot iron and drawn away. If the iron is at the right temperature and the
curd has sufficient acid development, the curd will stick to the iron
and when pulled away will form fine threads. The length of these threads
determines the amount of acid in the curd. The acid is usually spoken of
in terms of the length of threads, as 1/8 inch of acid, ½ inch of acid
and the like. The curd must have a slight development of acid before it
will stick to the iron. This test takes advantage of the peculiar
properties[90] of curd which are produced by the action of the acid on
the casein.

+200. Firmness of the curd.+--The cheese-maker must be able to judge the
firmness of the curd by physical examination. The particles of curd
should have shrunken to about one-half their original size and should be
of uniform consistency throughout; they should not have any soft
centers. The curd should be firm and springy. When a double handful is
pressed and suddenly released, the curd particles should spring apart.
The curd should have a "shotty" feeling when in the whey. If the curd
has attained the proper firmness, and the acid has not reached the
correct stage to remove the whey, it may be left in the whey until
sufficient acid development has been attained. This is liable to cause
the curd to become too firm and to result in a hard dry cheese. If there
is no evidence of the presence of undesirable organisms, such as bad
odors, or gas holes in the curd, it is better to remove the whey and
develop the acid when the curd is in the "pack." The pack refers to the
first piling of the curd.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--Whey siphon with strainer.]

The whey may be removed either by means of a faucet or gate in the vat
or by a siphon (Fig. 36). With either form of removal a whey-strainer
(Fig. 37) should be used to prevent loss of curd particles. It requires
considerable time for the whey to escape from a large vat. After the
curd has been heated to the proper temperature, it is well to remove a
portion of the whey. In doing this the surface of the whey should not be
drawn down quite to the top of the curd. When ready, the remaining whey
can be quickly removed.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--Whey strainer with spout to fit into the gate
in the vat.]

If it is decided that the curd is not firm enough, when the whey is
drawn down to the surface of the curd and the acid has developed
sufficiently, the curd should be firmed up in the whey by stirring it
vigorously by hand before the remainder of the whey is removed. This is
commonly called "hand stirring." This difficulty results either from the
use of too much starter or from holding the milk until too much acid
development has taken place before adding the rennet. Hand stirring
accomplishes what natural forces would accomplish if given sufficient
time. If the curd does not firm naturally in the whey, there is a large
loss of fat and other solids, because the pieces of curd will have to be
broken up to allow the water to escape from the soft centers of these
masses. This loss can usually be reduced by firming the curd in the whey
or adding water rather than by stirring without either water or whey. If
the curd is not properly firmed, it carries extra whey into the cheese.
With the increase in whey, the amount of milk-sugar carried into the
cheese increases. This extra milk-sugar attacked by bacteria produces an
excess of lactic acid, which results in "sour" cheeses. This explains
why the curd is placed beyond the danger of over-development of acid by
removing so large a portion of the whey. If the curd is properly firmed
in the whey and the whey is removed before too much acid has developed,
it is impossible to make a sour cheese.

+201. Gathering the curd together.+--Before the last of the whey has
been removed, the curd should be pushed back from the faucet into the
upper two-thirds of the vat and spread in an even layer. This layer
should be six to eight inches thick. The curd can be pushed back with
the rake or a board which will fit crosswise in the vat, in which are
many holes. As soon as the whey has been removed so that there is not
enough to wash the curd into the lower part of the vat, the vat should
be tilted and a ditch eight to ten inches wide cut in the curd through
the center. The curd from the ditch should be removed to either side and
spread evenly. As soon as all the whey has been removed, the pieces of
curd scattered about in the vat should be gathered up and placed with
the remainder.

In some factories, instead of matting the curd in the vat, a curd sink
is used. This is a wooden receptacle about the size of the vat but not
so deep, with a slatted false bottom. It is fitted with castors so that
it can be easily moved about. A cloth is placed in the sink and the curd
and whey are dipped upon the cloth. The whey escapes very rapidly
through the cloth. The curd sink is an advantage in those cases in which
it is desirable to remove the whey from the curd quickly, such as high
acid curds which have to be hand stirred to firm the curd. The
disadvantage lies in the work required to keep the sink and the large
cloth clean.

+202. Matting or cheddaring+ is the distinctive feature of the Cheddar
process. It is the piling and matting of the curd. Whether the curd is
matted in the vat or in the curd sink, the process is practically the
same. The object of cheddaring is three-fold: (1) to control the
incorporation of moisture; (2) to control undesirable ferments, if
present in the curd; (3) to develop the texture desired in the cheeses.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--A cheese knife.]

After the curd in the vat has become matted so that the particles stick
together, the masses on either side of the central channel are cut
crosswise into strips with a cheese knife (Fig. 38). The width of the
strip depends on the water-content of the curd at this stage. The more
water, the smaller should be the pieces of curd. This allows the whey to
drain away much more rapidly. As soon as the strips of curd are cut,
they should be turned over or stood on edge. A drain should be left
along the middle line of the vat and on each side. This permits the whey
to run away freely. If, on the other hand, the outlet is dammed up, the
curd may become "whey-soaked." This produces a soft mushy cheese which
sometimes is "acidy" or sour. After the curd is turned each time, all
crumbs of curd broken off should be brushed underneath the masses of
curd so that they will mat with it. They should never be placed on top
of the curd because they will not unite but will become dry and hard. If
the crumbs are not kept brushed up, they become dry and will cause an
open textured granular cheese and possibly lumps in the cheese. After
the pieces of curd have been turned several times, and the whey has
fairly completely drained away, they may be piled first two deep, then
three deep and so on, the depth of the piling being gauged by the
softness or amount of water in the curd and the temperature. The higher
the curd is piled, the more water it will retain (assimilate), so that
the amount of moisture in the curd is regulated by the size of the
pieces into which it is cut and the rapidity and depth to which it is
piled.

The curd should not be left too long from the time it is turned until it
is turned again. This period is usually about ten to fifteen minutes.
The moister the curd, the more often it should be turned. In turning,
care should be taken to keep the ends at the same temperature as the
remainder. This can be done by piling them inside, thereby keeping them
warm. There is a tendency for the ends of the pieces of curd to remain
granular and so cause an open-textured cheese.

During the cheddaring process, the temperature should be reduced
uniformly and gradually. If there is danger of the curd becoming too
cold, the vat should be covered and a pail of hot water may be placed
inside, if it is deemed necessary. The temperature of the curd should
not be allowed to go below 85° to 90° F. If kept too warm, the curd will
become soft and plastic, and if too cold, it will not mat together.

While the curd is being turned and piled, its physical properties are
changing. The acid develops. When the cheddaring process is completed,
the curd should be elastic, smooth and fibrous. The curd should have the
close meaty texture desired in the cheese. If this step in the process
is neglected, defects may appear later in the body, texture and flavor
of the cheese. Attempts to pile the curd too fast result in a soft,
mushy, open-textured product. Such cheese has mechanical holes, in which
moisture collects, and so is likely to cause rot while curing.

If gas is detected either before or during the cheddaring process, the
curd should be piled until the gas holes are no longer round but flat.
If the gas holes are not flattened or obliterated during this process,
the cheeses will be very liable to puff on the shelves in the
curing-room. The curd should be handled until the gas holes flatten out
evenly, although this may require considerable time. At best, gassy curd
will never produce the highest grade of cheese.

Cheddaring or piling the curd is not thoroughly understood by most
cheese-makers. Because the moisture contains the milk-sugar, there is
danger of having so much moisture present in the cheese that it will
become sour from the action of the lactic acid-forming bacteria on the
milk-sugar. A cheese may be sweet when made and later become sour
because it contains too much moisture or milk-sugar. This is known as
"shelf souring." For the proper cheddaring of a curd, it is necessary
that it be properly firmed in the whey. If the moisture is not evenly
incorporated, the cheese will have a mottled color. The pieces that have
the more moisture will be lighter colored. If the proper amount of
moisture is not incorporated, the cheese will be dry and hard, and if
too much, soft and pasty.

+203. Milling the curd.+--The large pieces formed by the cheddaring
process must be cut into small ones before the curd can be easily put
into the hoop. This is called "milling." Properly milled curd can be
salted evenly, cools more quickly and uniformly and can be distributed
evenly in the hoops.

The proper time to "mill" the curd is determined by its physical
condition. Some curds will cheddar much more rapidly than others, hence
no definite length of time can be given. Curd, when ready to mill,
should have a fibrous texture somewhat like the white meat of a chicken
breast. The pieces of curd should split very easily. When cut, the curd
should show a close, solid, smooth interior. The amount of lactic acid
developed may vary within rather wide limits. The hot iron may show
strings ½ to 1 inch long. The acidity (by titration of the freshly
separating whey) may be 0.45 to 0.65 of 1 per cent. If the curd has been
properly made, that is, firmed up in the whey with the proper acidity so
far, acid development during the cheddaring process will take care of
itself. The physical condition remains the principal means of
determining the time when the curd should be milled.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--Gosselin curd-mill.]

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Barnard curd-mill.]

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--Junker curd-mill.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Harris curd-mill.]

There are many kinds and styles of curd-mills on the market. Gosselin,
Barnard, Pohl, Junker, Victor, Harris are well-known kinds (Figs.
39-42). Some are hand, others power mills. Some of these tear the curd
into pieces of unequal size, others cut it into uniform pieces. A mill
that will do the work with the least possible pressure on the curd and
which will cut it into small uniform-sized pieces is most desirable. The
ideal mill should release the least fat and leave the curd in the best
condition to receive the salt. It is impossible to run curd through any
mill without exposing some fat on the freshly cut surfaces, and if the
curd is put under pressure, more fat will be pressed out and lost.
Cutting in the mill, like cutting the curd after coagulation by rennet,
may be called a necessary evil. There is an unavoidable mechanical loss
which may be greater or less according to the mill used. If the curd has
been properly handled so that the water in it has become thoroughly
assimilated (properly incorporated), this loss will be reduced to the
minimum. If the curd contains free moisture and many of the particles
have soft interiors, a stream of white whey will run down the vat as the
curd masses are cut. Some samples of such white whey will test as high
as 15 per cent fat. This not only causes a loss in yield but in quality
of cheese, according to the amount of fat lost. White whey is an
indication of loss of fat. If the proper amount of moisture is present
and is so thoroughly incorporated in the curd that it can be separated
only by evaporation, the ideal condition has been reached. While
milling, the cut curd should be stirred as fast as milled to prevent
matting again and to allow odors to escape. This stirring is usually
performed with a curd fork (Fig. 43). At the same time the temperature
will be lowered. The milled curd should be spread evenly over the upper
three-quarters of the bottom of the vat. The flavor of the curd that has
been made from tainted milk can be very much improved by stirring at
this time so that air can enter.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--A curd fork.]

A gassy curd, which has been held until the holes have become flattened,
should be stirred very frequently during this stage to allow the gas to
escape, thereby improving the flavor.

+204. Salting.+--Salt is added to Cheddar curd for several purposes: (1)
for its taste; (2) to aid in the removal of the whey and to harden and
shrink the curd; (3) to influence the fermentation by slowing down
acidification, checking the growth of unfavorable organisms and delaying
ripening. The salt should be pure. It should be coarse-grained, because
the large grains dissolve more slowly and permit its absorption to a
much larger extent than the fine-grained salt. Salt that dissolves
slowly is, therefore, to be sought for this purpose.

The following factors must be considered in determining the amount of
salt to be used: (1) the amount of curd from the milk; (2) the
percentage of water in the curd; (3) the acidity of the curd; (4) the
particular market form of cheese desired. The custom of determining the
quantity of salt by the weight of milk is an inaccurate practice. The
amount of salt should be based on the amount of curd. If the amount of
fat in the milk is known, a fairly accurate estimate of the amount of
curd can be made. It would be more accurate to weigh the curd before
salting, but this is not practicable or necessary to insure a good
quality of cheese. The amount of salt varies from 1½ to 2½ pounds
of salt to the curd from each 1000 pounds of milk.

The salt should not be added directly after milling because, at that
time, it would cause a large loss of fat. After milling there should be
time before salting for the freshly cut surfaces to dry or "heal over."
When first milled the curd has a dry harsh feeling; when ready to salt
it will feel soft and mellow and some moisture can usually be squeezed
out easily. Fifteen to twenty minutes from the time of milling are
required before the curd is ready for the salt. When ready, the curd
should be spread evenly over the bottom of the vat. The salt should be
carefully weighed, and then applied, evenly, over the surface of the
curd, in two or three applications. The curd should be thoroughly
stirred after each application of salt. While the salt is being
dissolved and absorbed, the curd should be stirred occasionally to
prevent lumps from forming.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--Wilson press hoop. _A_, complete hoop; _B_,
bottom cover with wide flange; _C_, top cover with narrow flange; _D_,
closed body; _E_, bandager.]

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Fraser press hoop. _A_, complete hoop; _B_,
bandager; _C_, follower; _D_, fibrous press ring.]

+205. Hooping the curd.+--When the salt has become dissolved and the
curd as soft and mellow as before the salt was added, it is ready to be
put into the hoop. Various sized hoops may be used, depending on the
desired size of the cheese. Two types are the Wilson and the Fraser
(Figs. 44, 45). With either type, a dampened press cloth should be cut
just to fit the bottom of the hoop. A starched circle may or may not be
used; if used, it should be placed on top of the press cloth. The
bandage now commonly employed is the seamless one which comes in the
form of a tube of various sizes for different sized hoops. The lengths
of bandage cut for each hoop or cheese depend on the height of the
cheese plus about one and one-half inches' lap on each end. The bandage,
after being cut the desired length, is placed on the part of the hoop
made to hold it, so that it is suspended about the side of the hoop and
laps about one and one-half inches on the bottom. The bandage should be
free from ravelings and placed squarely in the hoop.

The hoop is now ready to fill with curd. Enough hoops should be prepared
to hold all the day's curd as fast as it is ready. In order to have all
the cheeses as nearly as possible of the same size, it is advisable to
weigh the curd into the hoops. The curd may be measured into the hoops,
but this is not so accurate. The curd may be dipped with a flat-sided
curd pail or a curd scoop into the hoops (Fig. 46).

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Curd scoop and pail.]

+206. Pressing the curd.+--The natural changes sought in the curd
require a period of at least five hours between the time of setting
(addition of the rennet) and the pressing of the curd. Less time than
this involves loss in yield and quality of the cheese. In other words,
the time requirement for these changes cannot be ignored. The object of
pressing is not primarily to remove whey but to produce the physical
conditions essential to ripening the cheese in a mass and put it in
convenient form for handling. The whey should have been removed during
the cooking and cheddaring. When ready for the press, the temperature of
the curd should be about 80° to 85° F.; it should be brought down to
this point during the milling, salting and hooping processes. If the
curd is put to press too warm or too cold, the following results may be
expected:

Too high temperature during pressing produces several faults, as:

  (1) Favors the development of undesirable ferments.

  (2) Causes excessive loss of fat.

  (3) Gives the curd pieces a greasy surface so that they
  will not readily pass into a compact cheese. If a cheese
  is greasy, the bandages will not stick.

  (4) Favors the formation of mechanical holes in the
  cheese.

  (5) Causes "seamy" color in the cheese by the collection
  of fat between pieces of curd.

Too low temperature has its difficulties, such as:

  (1) The pieces of curd will not fuse together.

  (2) The rind does not form properly.

  (3) It appears to cause mottled cheese.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Continuous pressure gang cheese-press.]

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Filling the hoops and pressing the curd.]

The commonly used gang press may or may not have an arrangement to cause
continuous pressure to be applied to the cheese (Figs. 47, 48). When
fresh cheeses are first placed in the press, the pressure should be
applied very gradually. The curd, after being cut through the mill, will
have many exposed fat globules. A heavy pressure at first will force
out the whey set free by the extracting power of the salt. The whey will
carry away the exposed fat globules, and therefore reduce the yield. As
soon as white whey starts from the hoops, the increased application of
the pressure should be stopped until the whey regains the appearance of
clear brine. More pressure can then be gradually applied until full
pressure is reached. The cheeses should remain under heavy pressure for
one-half to one hour, when they should be removed from the press and
dressed.

+207. Dressing the cheese.+--When ready to dress the cheese, the press
is opened and the hoops turned down. The hoops are opened so that the
bandages can be lapped over the top of the cheeses about 1½ inches.
Before turning a bandage down, it should be carefully pulled up to
remove any wrinkles from the sides of the cheese, but not hard enough to
pull it free from the bottom. After it is pulled up, the bandage should
be lapped over the top about 1½ inches, and if not even should be
trimmed with a sharp knife. It should then be sopped down with warm
water. Plenty of warm water to wet the bandage and cloths helps to form
a good rind. If starched circles are used, one should be placed on the
top of the cheese and sopped down with warm water. If not, the press
cloth should be wrung out of warm water and put on smoothly, so there
will be no wrinkles. The hoop is then put together and placed back in
the press under heavy pressure for twelve to eighteen hours. The
pressure should be sufficient to cause the curd particles to unite so
that the surface of the cheese will be smooth. The next day the cheeses
are taken from the hoops and placed in the curing-room. If they do not
come out of the hoop easily, they may be loosened by cutting between the
sides of the cheese and the hoop with a knife. A special thin-bladed
knife for this purpose is called a speed knife (Fig. 49). Care should be
taken not to cut the bandage when trying to loosen the cheese. If
starched circles are used, the press cloths are removed from the cheese,
when they are put in the curing-room. If neither starched circles nor
press cloth are left on the cheese in the curing-room, the rind will
crack on account of drying out on the exposed surface. This allows mold
and insects to enter the cheese. The flavor, body and texture and color
of the cheese are all dependent on the skill of the cheese-maker and the
quality of the milk from which it is made. The finish is dependent
entirely on the skill and carefulness of the maker. An operator should
see that the cheese press is straight so that there will be no crocked
cheese and that the bandage and press cloths are properly put on,
because the finish or appearance of the cheese is an index of his
ability.

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--Speed knife.]

+208. Handling over-ripe and gassy milk.+--Because it is sometimes
necessary to make over-ripe[91] or gassy milk[92] into cheese, special
directions or precautions are necessary. The best way is to reject this
milk. When it is necessary to make it into cheese, the losses are much
more than with normal milk. It is a question of making as good a cheese
as possible, and the subject of losses is ignored.

(1) _Over-ripe milk._--The fact that the milk is over-ripe shows that
there is already too much acid present. Every effort must be made to get
the curd as firm as possible in the whey with the acid development as
low as possible or before the acid has had time to develop any more than
can be helped. Although the milk is over-ripe, it is a good plan to add
about ¼ of 1 per cent of starter just before the rennet. This starter
will not begin to work until the curd is being cheddared and it will
help the flavor, especially if any bad fermentation should be present.

The rennet is added at 80° F., as this lower temperature tends to check
the acid development. More rennet is used, commonly from 4 to 4½
ounces to 1000 pounds of milk. This gives a quicker coagulation. The
curd is cut soft, as this tends to expel the moisture more quickly. The
heat is turned on sooner after cutting. The time to turn it on and the
length of time to heat are determined by the amount of acid. A curd
should not be heated in less than fifteen minutes. If the curd has
enough acid and has not begun to firm up much, the whey should be drawn
down to the surface of the curd, water the temperature of the whey and
curd put into the vat, and the curd firmed up in this water. The water
washes the acid out of the curd and because of the lack of milk-sugar
checks the acid development.

If the milk is not so ripe and the curd nearly firm enough, the whey may
be drawn off and the curd firmed up by hard stirring in the vat or sink.
The curd should not be pushed back enough to be very deep or thick when
ready to cheddar.

The curd should be cut into very small pieces to cheddar. The smaller
the pieces, the faster the whey drains away. Sometimes it is necessary
to cut the curd into pieces six inches square. The pieces should not be
piled but should be turned often and stood on edge to let the whey drain
away and sometimes pressed with the hands to force the whey out. It is
often all one man can do to keep the curd turned.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--At the left is a regular shaped, close, solid
textured cheese; at the right one puffed up with gas.]

The curd is not cheddared very long but is milled early so that the whey
can escape. If it is thought that the cheese will be sour, the curd
should be washed in cold water to remove the acid and milk-sugar. A
little more salt is sometimes used. A product made from over-ripe milk,
no matter how skillful the cheese-maker, will show traces of a sour
cheese.

(2) _Gassy milk._--If a cheese-maker knows that there is "gassy"
fermentation, he should add more starter and develop more acid when
ripening the milk to try to overcome this. There are different kinds of
gassy fermentation. Some produce acid and some do not. Some will not
show until the cheeses have been on the curing-room shelves several
days. Others will cause the curd to float in the whey. Usually the gas
shows as pin-holes while the curd is being cheddared.

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--This shows the same cheeses as in Fig. 50, cut
open to show the solid and gassy texture.]

The gas causes tiny round holes in the cheese, resulting in the cheese
swelling or puffing out of shape and sometimes breaking open (Figs. 50,
51). The only time to overcome the gas is during the cheddaring process.
The curd is piled and repiled until the holes flatten out. This shows
that the gas-producing organisms have weakened and will not cause any
more holes. Because the curd has to be piled so many times and so long,
the pieces become very thin. The curd is ready to mill when most of the
holes have flattened. After milling, the curd should be stirred and
aired for some time before salting to allow the bad odor to escape.

Because of the high acid development, it often happens that the cheese
will not be gassy but will be sour. At best a cheese made from milk
having gassy fermentation will have a bad flavor. The quality of the
cheese can be no better than that of the milk from which it is made,
plus the skill of the cheese-maker.

+209. Qualities of Cheddar cheese.+--The cheese should be neat, clean
and attractive. If unclean, and the bandage not put on the cheese
properly, it shows that the manufacturer is not particular to keep the
curing-room shelves tidy nor careful and painstaking in dressing. The
cheese should not be lopsided or bulged. When cut, it should have a
uniformly colored interior. The principal color defects are too high, or
too light color, mottled or seamy. The texture should be solid and
close. A common defect is mechanical holes or openings and another is
gas pockets. The body can be tested by rubbing the cheese between the
thumb and fingers. It should be smooth and waxy and free from lumps. It
should rub down like cold butter. The common defects are graininess and
lumpiness. Graininess may be caused by too much acid or too much
moisture in the cheese. Lumpiness is due to uneven curing. If too much
moisture is present, the body will be soft and mushy; if not enough
moisture, the body will be hard and dry.

The cheese should have a pleasant, clean, mild aroma and the
characteristic flavor which is usually somewhat similar to that of nuts
and so is spoken of as a nutty flavor.




CHAPTER XIII

_COMPOSITION AND YIELD OF CHEDDAR CHEESE_


So many factors affect the composition and yield of Cheddar cheese that
no positive or exact statement can be made unless other facts are
definitely known. The following factors affect both the composition and
yield:

  1. The chemical composition of the milk.

  2. Amount of moisture incorporated into the cheese.

  3. The amount of solids lost in cheese-making.

  4. The skill of the cheese-maker.

  5. The bacterial-content of the milk.

+210. Composition of milk, whey and cheese.+--The
following Tables[93] VI, VII, VIII, which are the average
of forty-eight factories for the season of 1893, show the
minimum, maximum and average composition:


  TABLE VI

  AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF THE MILK

                      | Minimum | MAXIMUM | AVERAGE
  --------------------|---------|---------|---------
  Water               |  86.28  |  88.30  |  87.28
  Total solids        |  11.70  |  13.72  |  12.72
  Fat                 |   3.30  |   4.40  |   3.77
  Casein              |   2.20  |   2.85  |   2.48
  Albumin             |   0.52  |   0.81  |   0.69
  Sugar and ash, etc. |   5.63  |   5.89  |   5.78


  TABLE VII

  AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF THE WHEY

                      | Minimum | MAXIMUM | AVERAGE
  --------------------|---------|---------|---------
    Water             |  92.75  |  93.28  |  93.00
    Total solids      |   6.72  |   7.25  |   7.00
    Fat               |   0.24  |   0.51  |   0.38
    Casein, albumin   |   0.66  |   0.99  |   0.86
    Sugar, ash, etc.  |   5.63  |   5.86  |   5.76


  TABLE VIII

  AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF THE GREEN CHEESE

                      | Minimum | MAXIMUM | AVERAGE
  --------------------|---------|---------|---------
    Water             |  33.16  |  43.89  |  37.33
    Total solids      |  66.84  |  56.11  |  62.67
    Fat               |  30.00  |  35.89  |  33.41
    Casein            |  20.80  |  25.48  |  23.39
    Sugar, ash, etc.  |   4.86  |   7.02  |   5.89

Table VI shows the minimum, maximum and average composition of the milk
and Table VIII the composition of the cheese made from that milk. The
average composition of the cheese in Table VIII shows that it contains
37.33 per cent of water. The tendency to-day seems to be for a softer
cheese so that the average would probably be higher. Table VIII also
shows the wide variation in the composition of the cheese. The moisture
and total solids both vary about 10 per cent. In order to judge the
variation in composition, one must know the composition of the milk and
the moisture-content of the cheese and then only a very inaccurate
estimate of the composition of the cheese can be formed.

+211. Relation of fat to casein in normal milk.+--In order to understand
the relation of the composition of the milk to yield of cheese, one must
be familiar with the relation of the fat to the casein in normal milk.
The following table[94] shows the relation of fat to casein in normal
milk:


  TABLE IX

  SUMMARY SHOWING THE RELATION OF FAT TO CASEIN
  IN NORMAL MILK

  ====================================================================
          |           |          |           |           |  AVERAGE
          |           |          |  AVERAGE  | AVERAGE   | POUNDS OF
          | PER CENT  |  NUMBER  | PER CENT  | PER CENT  | CASEIN FOR
  GROUP   | OF FAT IN |    OF    | OF FAT IN | OF CASEIN | EACH POUND
          |   MILK    |  SAMPLES |  EACH IN  |   EACH    | OF FAT IN
          |           |          |   GROUP   |   GROUP   |   MILK
  --------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------+------------
    I     | 3.0-3.5   |   22     |   3.35    |   2.20    |   0.66
   II     | 3.5-4.0   |  112     |   3.72    |   2.46    |   0.66
  III     | 4.0-4.5   |   78     |   4.15    |   2.70    |   0.65
   IV     | 4.5-5.0   |   16     |   4.74    |   3.05    |   0.64
    V     | 5.0-5.25  |    7     |   5.13    |   3.12    |   0.61
  ====================================================================

Table IX shows that the pounds of casein for each pound of fat are not
constant but that the casein does not increase in proportion to the fat
above 4.0 per cent of fat in the milk.

+212. Influence of fat in milk on yield of cheese.+--The following table
shows the influence which fat in the milk has on the yield of
cheese:[94]


  TABLE X

  SUMMARY SHOWING RELATION OF FAT IN MILK TO YIELD
  OF CHEESE

  ==============================================================
        | AVERAGE PER | POUNDS OF GREEN CHEESE |   POUNDS OF
  GROUP | CENT OF FAT |  MADE FROM 100 LB. OF  |  GREEN CHEESE
        |  IN MILK    |          MILK          | MADE FOR 1 LB.
        |             |                        | OF FAT IN MILK
  ------+-------------+------------------------+----------------
     I  |    3.35     |         9.14           |     2.73
    II  |    3.72     |        10.04           |     2.73
   III  |    4.15     |        11.34           |     2.70
    IV  |    4.74     |        12.85           |     2.71
     V  |    5.13     |        13.62           |     2.66
  ==============================================================

Table X shows that as the fat in the milk increases, the pounds of
cheese made from 100 pounds of that milk increases; but the amount of
cheese made for each pound of fat in the milk does not increase. This is
due to the fact pointed out in Table IX, namely, that as the fat
increases in the milk the casein does not increase in the rich milk in
proportion to the fat. From Tables IX and X this conclusion may be
drawn: that as the percentage of fat increases in the milk the more
cheese can be made from 100 pounds of that milk, but after the increase
in fat gets above 4 per cent the amount of cheese that can be made for
each pound of fat in the milk is decreased because the casein does not
increase in proportion to the fat. No exact statement of yield can be
made without first stating the moisture-content of the cheese. The
losses also must be considered.

Van Slyke[95] in the following Table XI shows the effect of the
fat-content of normal milk on the yield of cheese.

The moisture-content of all the cheeses is reduced to a uniform basis of
37 per cent. (See cut showing yield of cheese, Fig. 52.)

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--The figures represent the relative yield of
cheese containing different percentages of fat, but all have a uniform
content of 37 per cent water.]


  TABLE XI

  TABLE SHOWING THE EFFECT OF THE FAT-CONTENT OF
  NORMAL MILK ON THE YIELD OF CHEESE

  ----------------+-------------+--------------+-------------------
  PER CENT OF FAT | PER CENT OF | AMOUNT OF    | AMOUNT OF CHEESE
  IN THE MILK     | CASEIN IN   | CHEESE MADE  | MADE FOR EACH
                  | THE MILK    | FROM 100 LB. | POUND OF FAT
                  |             | OF MILK      | IN THE MILK
  ----------------+-------------+--------------+-------------------
    3.00          |  2.10       |    8.30      |    2.77
    3.25          |  2.20       |    8.88      |    2.73
    3.50          |  2.30       |    9.45      |    2.70
    3.75          |  2.40       |   10.03      |    2.67
    4.00          |  2.50       |   10.60      |    2.65
    4.25          |  2.60       |   11.17      |    2.63
    4.50          |  2.70       |   11.74      |    2.61
    4.75          |  2.80       |   12.31      |    2.59
    5.00          |  2.90       |   12.90      |    2.58
  ----------------+-------------+--------------+-------------------

+213. Fat loss in cheese-making.+--The amount of solids lost in the whey
also affects the yield. The following table gives the amount of fat lost
in whey with normal milk containing different percentages of fat:


  TABLE XII

  SUMMARY SHOWING AMOUNT OF FAT IN MILK LOST IN
  CHEESE-MAKING

  =================================================================
  GROUP | POUNDS OF FAT IN | POUNDS OF FAT LOST |  PER CENT OF FAT
        | 100 LB OF MILK   | IN WHEY FOR 100    |  IN MILK LOST
        |                  | LB. OF MILK        |  IN WHEY
  ------+------------------+--------------------+------------------
     I  |   3 to 3.5       |       0.32         |      9.55
    II  |   3.5 to 4       |       0.33         |      8.33
   III  |   4 to 4.5       |       0.32         |      7.70
    IV  |   4.5 to 5       |       0.28         |      5.90
     V  |   5 to 5.25      |       0.31         |      6.00
  =================================================================

Table XII shows that the percentage of fat in the whey is approximately
the same for milk high or low in fat. But the milk low in fat loses a
higher percentage of the total milk-fat in each 100 pounds of whey.

+214. Effect of bacterial-content of milk on yield of cheese.+--The
bacterial-content[96] of the milk influences the yield by affecting both
the moisture-content and the losses. If the milk is sour or has bad
fermentation, the losses will be increased because the curd cannot be
carefully handled, and the moisture cannot be incorporated to the extent
that it can in clean milk, without injury to the quality. The
proper-cooling of the milk in one instance increased the yield 0.3 pound
of cheese for each 100 pounds of milk. The more moisture that can be
incorporated into the cheese up to the legal limit, the greater the
yield.

+215. Factors affecting the moisture-content of Cheddar.+--The amount of
moisture that can be incorporated in a curd depends on several
factors.[97] The following increase the moisture-content control of the
cheese:

   1. Cutting the curd coarse.

   2. High setting temperature.

   3. Low acid in the curd at time of removing whey.

   4. Not stirring the curd with the hand as the last of the whey is
        removed.

   5. Slow pressure.

   6. High piling of the curd in the cheddaring process.

   7. Small amount of salt.

   8. Holding the curd at low temperature after the whey is removed.

   9. Large amount of rennet.

  10. Cutting the curd hard.

The following factors decrease the moisture-content of the cheese:

   1. Fine cutting.

   2. Low setting temperature.

   3. High acid in the curd at time of removing the whey.

   4. Stirring the curd with the hand as the last of the whey is removed.

   5. Fast pressure.

   6. Low piling of the curd in the cheddaring process.

   7. Large amount of salt.

   8. Holding the curd at high temperature after the
        whey is removed.

   9. Small amount of rennet.

  10. Cutting the curd soft.

From this discussion, it is evident that the yield of cheese from 100
pounds of milk increases with higher percentages of fat and casein in
the milk, with reduced losses of solids during manufacture, with the
absence of undesirable fermentations, and with the incorporation of
large amounts of water.

+216. Variations of the Cheddar process.+--The Cheddar process, as
already described, is widely employed in cheese factories. Many
varieties are found, however, and varietal names are used for such
products. A whole series of these forms are either locally or widely
made in England and taught in the English dairy schools. Some of these
varieties resemble the factory Cheddar product fairly closely; others
are clearly different products. A typical series of the variations as
developed in America will be considered.

In the commercial trade Cheddar cheese is usually designated by some
name which indicates its size. The size of the cheese is determined by
that of the hoops. The hoops vary both in diameter and height. The table
on the following page shows the usual sizes of the hoops and the weight
and name applied to the cheese.

+217. Cheddar-type cheese from pasteurized milk.+--Sammis and Bruhn[98]
have described a variation of the Cheddar process to overcome the
difficulties of making cheese from pasteurized milk. Such milk curdles in
very unsatisfactory manner unless some chemical is added to compensate
for the salts lost and to offset the other changes resulting from heat.
For this purpose, they found the use of hydrochloric acid satisfactory.

  TABLE XIII

  SIZE OF CHEESE HOOPS, WEIGHT, AND TERM APPLIED TO
  CHEESE

  ========================================================================
   DIAMETER OF   |     HEIGHT OF     | WEIGHT OF  | TERM APPLIED TO
      HOOP       |      CHEESE       |  CHEESE    |     CHEESE
                 |                   |  POUNDS    |
  ---------------+-------------------+------------+-----------------------
  6-7 in.        |     7-8 in.       |    9-11    | Young America
  Tapers 5-7 in. |    10-14 in.      |   10-16    | Long Horn
  12-14 in.      |    3½-4½ in.      |   18-24    | Daisy or Picnic
  14-15½ in.     |     4-6 in.       |   30-40    | Twin (two in same box)
  14-16 in.      |     4-7 in.       |   35-40    | Flat
  13½-15 in.     |    10-12 in.      |   40-50    | Cheddar
  14-16 in.      |    12-15 in.      |   75-90    | Export
  ========================================================================

"The acidulation of milk with hydrochloric acid after pasteurization is
accomplished without difficulty or danger of curdling by running a small
stream of the acid, of normal concentration, into the cooled milk as it
flows from the continuous pasteurizer into the cheese vat. One pound of
normal-strength acid is sufficient to raise 100 pounds of milk from 0.16
percent to 0.25 percent acidity (calculated as per cent of lactic acid).
The amount of acid needed each day to bring the milk up to 0.25 per cent
acidity is read from a table or calculated from the weight of the milk
and its acidity, determined by the use of Manns's acid test (titration
with tenth-normal sodium hydrate and phenolphthalein). The preparation
of standard-strength acid in carboy lots for this work and the
acidulation of milk present no great difficulty to any one who is able
to handle Manns's acid test correctly.

"After the milk is pasteurized and acidulated three-fourths per cent of
first-class starter is added and the vat is heated to 85°. It is set
with rennet, using 2 ounces of rennet per thousand pounds of milk, so
that the milk begins to curdle in 7 minutes and is cut with three-eighth
inch knives in 25 minutes. All portions of the work after adding rennet
are carried out in an unvarying routine manner, according to a
fixed-time schedule every day. As soon as the rennet has been added the
cheese maker is able to calculate the exact time of day when each of the
succeeding operations should be performed, and the work of making the
cheese is thus simplified and systematized. It is possible that the
routine process here described may be varied somewhat with advantage at
different factories."

This cheese usually lacks characteristic Cheddar flavor or contains it
in very mild form. It therefore satisfies only those who seek very mild
flavored products. Efforts are now being made to find a flavor producing
substance or organism which will bring the flavor of this product more
nearly to that of typical Cheddar.

+218. Club cheese+ is known by a variety of trade names. It is made from
Cheddar cheese, so that it is especially liked by persons who care for
strong Cheddar flavor. It has a soft texture so that it spreads easily,
and is therefore much used for sandwiches. Well-ripened or old Cheddar
cheese is ground in a food chopper. The older the Cheddar, the stronger
will be the flavor of the club cheese. Cheese of good flavor should be
used. In order to do away with all lumps in the texture, it is sometimes
necessary to run the mixed cheese through the food chopper a second
time. While all lumps must be worked out, care should be taken not to
work the cheese so much that it will become salvy and sticky.

Usually a little pepper is added, to give the cheese a biting taste.
Some manufacturers add a great variety of substances, but these are not
necessary and destroy the flavor of the cheese.

Club cheese may be wrapped in tin-foil or put up in air-tight glass
jars. The latter practice, while more expensive, has the advantage of
making the cheese keep longer; but for local trade tin-foil is just as
satisfactory as glass. In filling the glass, care must be taken not to
leave any air spaces between the cheese and the glass, as this is likely
to permit the cheese to mold. A glass jar can be filled and air spaces
prevented by first smearing a very thin layer of cheese over the glass.

+219. The stirred-curd or granular process.+--The original practice as
brought from England and followed in the farm dairies before the
development of the factory system is now known variously as the
"stirred-curd" or "granular curd" process. With the introduction of the
cheese factory, as known to-day, this system was replaced by the Cheddar
cheese. The old farm process is still used on some farms and in a few
factories. As the name indicates, the curd for such cheeses is kept
stirred so that it remains in granular condition instead of being
allowed to mat as in the Cheddar process.

The early steps of the two processes are identical. They diverge at the
point at which in the factory Cheddar process the whey is drawn and the
curd is allowed to mat. In some factories the curd and part of the whey
are dipped into a curd sink. This allows the whey to escape more easily
and quickly. In the stirred-curd process, the pieces of curd are kept
separated by stirring and not allowed to mat. The whey is drawn off and
the stirring continued by hand. After stirring fifteen to twenty
minutes, the curd becomes so dry as not to mat easily. As soon as the
curd has reached this stage, the salt is evenly and thoroughly mixed
with it. More salt is added than in the Cheddar process because the curd
is more moist than Cheddar curd at the time of salting. The whey freely
separating carries away much of the salt. The quantity of salt to use
depends on the amount of whey draining from the curd. After salting, the
curd is allowed to cool, with occasional stirring to prevent the
formation of lumps. The advantage of the stirred-curd practice lies in
the shorter time required for making cheese and in the greater yield due
to increased water-content. It has several disadvantages, among them
being: (1) lack of control of undesirable fermentation; if gas organisms
are present, the cheeses more frequently huff than with the Cheddar
system; (2) there is more fat lost while stirring the curd, hence
quality and yield suffer; (3) the water is not so thoroughly
incorporated, which more frequently results in mottled cheeses; (4) the
body is commonly soft and "weak," shows mechanical holes, and cures too
rapidly. These faults are closely correlated with the presence of higher
percentages of water than in cheeses made by the Cheddar process. In
other words, the stirred-curd process usually produces a cheese with
higher water-content, hence more subject to the development of
unfavorable fermentation than the Cheddar cheeses.

+220. California Jack cheese+[99] is very similar to the stirred-curd or
granular process. This cheese was originally made in Monterey County on
the coast of California, about twenty-five years ago, in small
quantities, but after it was found to sell well other counties started
to manufacture it. As Monterey was the first county to make this
product, it was named "Monterey" cheese. In order to distinguish the
cheese made in other counties from this, it was suggested that it be
given a name and, consequently, it was called "Jack" cheese. This has
been accepted as its true name. The cheese is made mostly by Portuguese
and Italian-Swiss, although some of the best of the variety is now
manufactured near Modesto, California.

This cheese is adapted for manufacture on small dairy farms, where there
is inexpensive and scanty equipment. The smaller sizes of cheese are
made and ripened quickly. It has become widely used in California.

The cheese is made every morning, from evening's and morning's milk. The
former is put into the cheese vat at night, and morning's milk is added
as milking is going on. When the milk is all in the vat, it is
immediately warmed to 86° to 88° F. and rennet extract is added (when
milk has 0.2 to 0.21 of 1 per cent acidity) at the rate of 6 to 8 ounces
to 1000 pounds of milk. No coloring matter is used. It is ready for the
curd-knife in thirty to thirty-five minutes, its readiness being
determined the same as in making Cheddar cheese. The curd is first cut
lengthwise of the vat with the horizontal curd-knife and allowed to
stand until the whey rises over and partly covers the curd, when it is
cut again with the vertical curd-knife crosswise of the vat. It is then
hand-stirred, gently at first, and the stirring is finished with the
rake.

Either a steam-heating or self-heating vat is used (the steam-heating
vat is preferred) and temperature increased about one degree in five
minutes. The curd is heated to 98° F. in winter, and to 105° F. to 110°
F. in summer. After temperature is up, it is stirred occasionally with a
rake until the whey is drawn at 0.14 to 0.15 of 1 per cent acidity.

The curd is hand-stirred as soon as the whey is nearly drained off, and
raked to each side of the vat to drain more thoroughly, when it is
quickly stirred again to keep it from lumping or matting. Salt is now
added at the rate of 1½ pounds to 100 pounds of curd, and stirred in
thoroughly several times. During the salting process, cold water is
allowed to run under the vat, the hot water having been run off
previously.

Curd is put into cloths at a temperature of 80° to 85° F. No cheese
hoops are used. Two sets of press cloths are necessary; one set is ready
to use while the other is still on the cheese in the press. These press
cloths are about one yard square. The press cloths are all laid out
evenly one on top of the other, as many as there are cheeses. They are
then taken together and spread out over the top of a large, open tin
milk-pail, and pushed down in the center to the bottom of the pail, with
the edges hanging over the top. A common one-gallon lard pail is used to
measure the curd into the press cloths. A lard pail full will make a
cheese weighing six and one-half pounds, which is the popular size.
After a pailful has been put into the press cloth, the four corners are
caught up with the left hand, while with the right hand the curd is
formed round and the press cloth straightened and the other corners in
turn taken up. The press cloth is now taken up tight over the curd with
the left hand, while the cheese is given a rolling motion on the table
with the right hand, pressing at the same time to expel some of the
whey. This twists the press cloth tight over the curd, where it is tied
with a stout string. After fixing them all (as many as there are
cheeses) in this way, they are ready for the press.

The cheeses are pressed between two wooden planks, 12 inches wide, 1½
inches thick, by whatever length is required for the number of cheeses
to be pressed. One plank is nailed on supports at a convenient height
from the floor on a little slant for the whey to drain off better. The
cheeses in the press cloths are placed at the proper distance apart so
they do not touch. Then the other plank is put squarely over the top of
the cheese and levers about four feet long at an interval of five feet
are placed over this plank, from a cleat in the wall, on the other end
of which is placed a heavy weight of about 100 pounds, which acts as an
automatic pressure. The cheeses are left in the press until the next
morning, when they are taken out and put on the shelves in the
curing-room. The cheeses have no bandage or covering, and do not seem to
crock, and they form a very good rind.

The cheese is a sweet variety, weighs six and one-half pounds cured and
cures in about three weeks ready to ship, and sells at 16 to 25 cents a
pound wholesale. Most of the work seems to lie in forming and rolling
the curd in press cloths before pressing. Trouble is experienced by the
makers, especially in warm climates in summer, in not having the milk at
a uniform acidity when rennet is added. Great improvements could be made
in this cheese by using an acidimeter, paraffining and curing the cheese
in an even temperature, not much over 60° F.

Old and hard Jack cheese is also employed for grating and cooking, while
the fresh is used for the table.

+221. The washed-curd process+ has been developed in recent years
largely in the state of New York. In this method, a regular Cheddar curd
is made up to the time of milling. This curd is washed or soaked in cold
water during or directly after milling. The theoretical object of this
washing is to carry away bad flavors and to reduce over-development of
acidity by washing away all traces of whey. However, cheese-makers soon
found that it increased the yield and this led some to carry it to
extremes.

After the curd has been milled, it is covered with cold water. The
temperature of this water ranges from 50° F. to 70° F. The curd is
stirred in this water for various lengths of time according to the
judgment of the cheese-maker. This time varies from five minutes to one
hour. Sometimes the vat is partly filled with water and the curd milled
directly into the water. This process has certain advantages and
disadvantages.

The advantages are: if too much acid has developed in the curd, this
washing will reduce it so that the cheese will not be sour. Sometimes
when bad flavors are present in the curd, washing will tend to overcome
or remove them. Its disadvantages are: the larger yield due to excessive
soaking tempts the makers to soak curd beyond the time needed to relieve
the initially sour condition. Curd soaked in this way produces cheeses
containing percentages of water so high as to lower their quality. This
increases the yield sometimes as much as 3 to 5 per cent. Such a cheese
is very soft in texture and does not cure like a Cheddar cheese which
has not been washed. Part of the lactic acid, milk-sugar[100] and the
inorganic salts are removed by this washing. A washed-curd cheese will
sometimes rot, due to the activity of the putrefactive bacteria, and to
the lack of the restraining effect of the lactic acid-forming bacteria.
Some washed-curd cheeses are so soft that they will not retain their
normal shape.

A washed-curd cheese is never sour because the milk-sugar and lactic
acid have been removed by washing.

+222. English dairy cheese.+--In some localities cheeses are still made
on the farms. These are mostly produced after the stirred-curd process,
hence are soft-bodied and open-textured. They usually weigh ten to
twelve pounds and are three to four inches thick and twelve inches in
diameter.

+223. Pineapple cheese.+--This variety derives its name from the fact
that the cheeses are made in about the size and shape of a pineapple.
The curd is made after the Cheddar process from either whole milk or
partly skimmed milk. It is pressed in molds shaped like a pineapple. The
cheeses are then hung in nets to give the checked appearance on the
surface. They are rubbed with linseed oil to prevent the surface
cracking, and finally are shellacked.

+224. Leyden.+--Among specialties, a cheese called Leyden originating in
Holland is made in Michigan and New York. This is a part skim cheese
heavily spiced with caraway seed. The ripe cheese is colored red as it
goes to market.

+225. Cheddar cheese with pimientos.+--Recently some Cheddar cheeses
have been made with pimientos added. This gives a mixture of
characteristic Cheddar and pimiento flavors, which seems to be desired
by some persons. An ordinary Cheddar curd is made and the pimientos
added just before salting. The pimientos are ground rather coarsely and
then added to the curd together with the liquid which was with the
pimientos in the can. The pimiento should be thoroughly and evenly
mixed with the curd to insure a uniform distribution and mottled color
in the cheese. The salt is then applied. The remainder of the process is
the same as for ordinary Cheddar cheese.

+226. Sage cheese+ is a product flavored from the leaves of the ordinary
garden sage. It is made by two methods: one, in which the sage leaves
are used, and the other, in which a part of the curd is colored to
imitate that given by the sage leaves, and sage oil or tea is used to
give the flavor.

In the leaf method, a regular Cheddar cheese curd is made up to the time
of salting. Just before the salt is added, sage leaves are mixed with
the curd. The leaves should be dried and freed from stems and other
coarse particles and the leaves themselves broken up rather finely. The
leaves are then added at the rate of 3 ounces for every 1000 pounds of
milk. Care must be exercised to see that the leaves are evenly mixed
through the curd or an evenly mottled cheese will not result. The salt
is then added. This sequence seems to increase the absorption of the
flavor by the curd.

If these cheeses are consumed as soon as well cured, no fault can be
found. On the other hand, if they are held for any length of time,
yellow areas form about each piece of sage leaf; the leaves decay
rapidly and spoil the cheese. This method gives a very true flavored
sage cheese, the only objection being that it cannot be held in storage
for any length of time without a marked deterioration.

In the other method of making sage cheese, either a vat with a movable
partition or a large and a small vat must be used. In many cases the
receiving can is used as the small vat. After the milk is properly
ripened and ready to set, one-sixth to one-seventh of the milk is put
into the small vat. To this small vat, green coloring matter is added.
Juice from the leaves of corn, clover, or spinach was formerly used as
coloring. Consequently the manufacture of sage cheese by this method was
limited to the seasons of the year when these leaves could be obtained.
Now, however, the dairy supply houses have a harmless green color paste
which is much cheaper and can be secured at any season of the year. The
amount of color paste to use will vary from 30 to 35 c.c. for every 1000
pounds of total milk. This should be added to the small vat of milk. It
gives a green milk and later a green curd.

Both vats are worked along together, until the time for removing the
whey. Then the partition in the vat is removed or the small vat is mixed
with the large one. The green curd should then be evenly mixed with the
white one or an even green mottled cheese will not result. The curds
should not be mixed until they are well firmed or the white curd will
take on a greenish cast and spoil the appearance of the cheese.

After the whey is removed, the curd is allowed to mat as in ordinary
Cheddar but care must be exercised to pile the curd so that it cannot
spread or "draw" out. If it does draw out, the small green spots will be
stretched out and large blotches or patches of green will be the result.
The cheese-maker must watch the curd closely or he may not secure the
much desired small green mottles. When the curd is well matted, it is
milled as in Cheddar. Just before the salt is added, the sage extract is
applied to the curd.

The sage extract can be obtained from dairy supply houses, or a sage
tea can be made by steeping the sage leaves. In many cases the
commercial extract gives the cheese a strong disagreeable flavor, but
not a true sage flavor. The sage tea gives a flavor more like that of
the leaves themselves. Too much of the extract or the leaves will give a
very rank flavor. The sage extract can best be put on the curd by means
of a sprayer or atomizer with which it can be evenly sprayed over the
entire surface. The extract should be applied two or three times and the
curd well stirred after each application. The amount of the extract to
use depends altogether on its strength; an ounce of the extract or three
ounces of sage tea to 1000 pounds of milk is about the correct amount.
After the extract has been added, the salt is used at the same rate as
with a normal Cheddar curd and the sage curd is carried along the same
as a Cheddar.

This extract method gives a sage cheese mottled with small green spots
which somewhat resemble the green of sage leaves. A cheese made in this
way can be held for a long time, as nothing has been added which can
decay. The only objection to this method is that the sage extract may
not give a true sage flavor. Therefore, the maker must try to obtain the
best extract possible or make his own from the sage leaves.

+227. Skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese.+[101]--The process of making
skimmed-milk cheese after the Cheddar process is varied with the amount
of fat left in the milk. Before attempting to make skimmed-milk Cheddar,
one should become familiar with the process for whole-milk Cheddar.
Skimmed-milk cheeses are usually highly colored.

When part skimmed-milk cheese is manufactured, there is often
difficulty in getting the milk in the vat to test the desired percentage
of fat. Some cheese-makers skim all the milk and then put in the desired
amount of cream. This practice seems wasteful, not only because of the
cost of separation, but because the fat will not mix easily with the
milk but will tend to float on the surface. If the fat floats, there
will be a large loss. After a very few trials an operator can tell about
how much of the whole milk must be skimmed in order to have the mixed
skimmed-milk and whole milk test the desired percentage of fat. The
necessary percentage of fat in the mixed milk to produce cheese of a
certain grade can be determined by testing the cheese by the Babcock
test. (See Chapter XIX.)

+228. Full skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese.+--In the summer there is not
much demand for full skimmed-milk cheese, but it is made in large
quantity in winter. The method of manufacture is as follows:

Skimmed-milk as it comes from the separator is at a temperature of about
88° to 90° F.; it is ripened and set at this temperature. It is ripened
rather highly on the acid test, from 0.18 to 0.20 of 1 per cent, and to
correspond on the rennet test which will not be many spaces. In about
twenty-five to thirty minutes it is coagulated ready for cutting. The
curd of skimmed-milk cheese is cut a little softer than is that of
whole-milk cheese. Milk is usually set at 88° to 90° F. The curd is not
ordinarily cooked above this temperature. If the milk was 84° to 86° F.
when set, then the curd should be raised to 88° to 90° F. The curd firms
in the whey very rapidly. When firm enough, it should have a slight
development of acid. On the acid test it should show 0.17 to 0.19 per
cent, and on the hot iron 1/8 to ¼ of an inch. The milk should be ripe
enough or starter enough should have been used, so that the acid will
continue to develop in the "pack" very rapidly. During the cheddaring
process the curd is piled more rapidly and in higher piles than is
customary with whole-milk cheese. This is necessary to incorporate or
assimilate a large percentage of water or whey in the cheese. Therefore
the process of skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese is much shorter. More acid is
developed with the skimmed-milk than with the whole-milk cheese because
it seems necessary to develop proper texture. If the acid is not
developed sufficiently, the cheese will be very rubbery and cure very
slowly, in which case bad fermentation and flavor may and often do
develop. The curd is turned, piled or cheddared in the vat until it
begins to become meaty and fibrous. If there is danger of too much acid,
the curd may be rinsed off with water. It is then milled and salted at
the rate of 1 or 1¼ pounds of salt to the curd from each 1000 pounds
of milk. The remainder of the process is the same as that for making
whole-milk cheese.

+229. Half skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese.+--No definite directions can be
given for the manufacture of part skimmed-milk cheese, because the
process varies with the amount of fat left in the milk. As the fat is
decreased, the process becomes more like that for making full
skimmed-milk cheese; as the fat is increased, the process becomes more
like that for whole-milk cheese. However, the process of making half
skimmed-milk cheese is about midway between the two. The milk is ripened
more than it would be for whole-milk cheese, usually until it tests from
0.15 to 0.17 of 1 per cent acid. The curd is coagulated and cut the same
as for the other skimmed-milk cheeses. It is cooked to a temperature
just sufficient to firm the curd, usually from 94° to 96° F. The lower
the temperature at which the curd can be cooked and yet become firm,
the better is the texture of the cheese. When the curd has firmed
enough, or when sufficient acid development, from 0.15 to 0.17 of 1 per
cent, has taken place, the whey is removed. The curd is then turned,
piled or cheddared. A skimmed-milk curd may be piled much more rapidly
than a whole-milk curd without danger of injuring it. When the curd
becomes meaty or fibrous, it is milled. It should be salted at the rate
of 1¼ to 2 pounds of salt to the curd from each 1000 pounds of milk.
The remainder of the process is the same as that for making whole-milk
cheese.

The cheese-maker should observe the following points when making
skimmed-milk cheese: (1) Have clean-flavored sweet milk; (2) use
clean-flavored commercial starter; (3) ripen the milk sufficiently, but
not too much; (4) firm the curd at as low a temperature as possible; (5)
have the curd properly firmed when the whey is drawn; (6) cheddar the
curd faster than the curd from whole milk; (7) make the cheeses all the
same size; (8) keep the cheese neat and clean in the curing-room.

+230. Yield and qualities of skimmed-milk Cheddar cheese.+--The results
of skimming different percentages of whole milk containing varying
percentages of fat are given in the following table. As the percentage
of fat in the milk decreases, the yield of cheese also decreases,
according to the table. As the percentage of fat decreases in the milk,
the percentage of moisture in the cheese increases, showing that
moisture is substituted for fat. The yield of cheese from 100 pounds of
milk is also given in this table. This yield varies with the amount of
moisture incorporated into the cheese, the amount of solids not fat in
the milk, and the solids lost in the whey.


  TABLE XIV

  TABLE SHOWING THE COMPOSITION AND YIELD OF SKIMMED-MILK
  CHEDDAR CHEESE

  ============================================================================
            |          |PERCENTAGE|NUMBER    | COMPOSITION OF THE CHEESE
  PERCENTAGE|PERCENTAGE|OF FAT IN |OF POUNDS +----------+----------+----------
  OF FAT    |OF THE    |THE MILK  |OF CHEESE |PERCENTAGE|          |
  IN THE    |MILK      |IN THE    |FROM 100  |OF TOTAL  |PERCENTAGE|PERCENTAGE
  MILK      |SKIMMED   |VAT AFTER |POUNDS    |OF TOTAL  |OF FAT    |OF WATER
            |          |SKIMMING  |OF MILK   |SOLIDS    |          |
  ----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------
     4.7    |    50    |    2.4   |   9.92   |  54.75   |   22.00  |  45.25
     4.7    |    60    |    2.0   |   9.74   |  52.46   |   17.50  |  47.54
     4.7    |    70    |    1.5   |   9.26   |  49.87   |   13.50  |  50.13
     4.7    |    80    |    1.0   |   8.42   |  48.26   |   10.00  |  51.74
     4.0    |    50    |    2.0   |   9.70   |  53.29   |   21.00  |  46.71
     4.0    |    60    |    1.6   |   9.50   |  50.89   |   17.00  |  49.11
     4.0    |    70    |    1.2   |   9.30   |  48.06   |   13.50  |  51.94
     4.0    |    80    |    0.9   |   9.20   |  45.24   |   10.50  |  54.76
     3.5    |    50    |    1.8   |   8.54   |  54.20   |   19.50  |  45.80
     3.5    |    60    |    1.5   |   8.10   |  51.10   |   16.50  |  48.90
     3.5    |    70    |    1.1   |   7.44   |  52.62   |   13.00  |  47.38
     3.5    |    80    |    O.9   |   7.00   |  49.64   |    9.54  |  50.36
     3.4    |    50    |    1.9   | 8.24[102]|  54.50   |   20.00  |  45.50
     3.4    |    60    |    1.5   |   7.82   |  52.05   |   16.50  |  47.95
     3.4    |    70    |   {1.4   |  {7.80   | {49.04   |  {14.00  | {50.96
            |          |   {1.2   |  {7.28   | {50.76   |  {14.00  | {49.24
     3.4    |    80    |    0.9   |   7.24   |  47.41   |   10.50  |  52.59
  ============================================================================

In some creameries and cheese factories, the milk is skimmed and the
cream made into butter and the skimmed-milk into cheese by the Cheddar
process. In making cheese without the milk-fat, it is difficult to
standardize a method that will produce the flavor and body of the
whole-milk Cheddar cheese. A skimmed-milk cheese lacks the softness and
mellowness of texture of the whole-milk product. It is very likely to be
tough, dry or leathery. It is attempted to remedy this defect by
incorporating more moisture into the skimmed-milk cheese. The added
moisture tends to replace the fat in giving a soft mellow body. It
requires skill on the part of the cheese-maker to incorporate moisture
to take the place of the fat in giving the cheese mellowness and
smoothness of body.

The grades of skimmed-milk cheese vary between rather wide limits--from
those made entirely of skimmed-milk to those made of milk from which
only a small amount of fat has been removed and which are almost like
whole-milk cheese. Because of the gradations of skimmed-milk cheese, it
is difficult to make anything but general statements and to base
comparisons with whole-milk cheese.




CHAPTER XIV

_CHEDDAR CHEESE RIPENING_


Freshly made Cheddar cheese is hard, tough and elastic and lacks
characteristic cheese flavor. In this condition it is called "green,"
unripe or not cured. Before the cheese is ready to be eaten, it passes
through a complex series of changes which are collectively known as
ripening. In the ripening process the texture becomes soft and mellow
and the characteristic cheese flavors develop. Cheese ripening must be
considered from two view-points, first, the changes taking place inside
the cheese and secondly the outside conditions necessary for ripening.
Some of the chemical changes during ripening are known, while others are
not understood. The different agents causing ripening, and the
constituents of the milk, will be discussed.

+231. Fat.+--Numerous investigations have been made to ascertain what
chemical changes the fat undergoes in the ripening process. Suzuki,[103]
in studying the fat, found no enzyme capable of producing lactic acid or
volatile fatty acids. However, these acids were found in increasing
amounts during the ripening process and after the lactose had
disappeared. Acetic and propionic acids reached a maximum at three
months and then decreased, while butyric and caproic acids continually
increased during the experimental period covered. Formic acid was
detected in the whole-milk cheese only at the five and one-half month
stage. In the judgment of the experimenter the principal source of
acetic and propionic acids was probably lactates. Traces of these acids
may have had their origin in protein decomposition or further
fermentation of glycerine. The principal sources indicated for butyric
and caproic acids were fats and proteins.

The distillate from the experimental cheese was designated "flavor
solution" and contained alcohols and esters, giving a close resemblance
to the cheese aroma. The "flavor solution" from the mild whole-milk
cheese contained esters made up largely of ethyl alcohol and acetic
acid, while from the more pungent skimmed-milk cheese the esters were
largely compounds of ethyl alcohol and caproic and butyric acids. The
alcohol may have come from the lactose fermentation. It appears to be an
important factor in flavor production. The agencies operative in the
production of volatile acids and syntheses of esters are as yet
undefined.

+232. Milk-sugar.+--The milk-sugar (lactose) is changed into lactic acid
by the lactic acid-forming organisms, within the first few days after
the cheese is made. This acid is combined with the other constituents as
fast as it is formed. After a few days, the milk-sugar will have
entirely disappeared from the cheese.[104] The relation between the
milk-sugar and lactic acid is very close. It is necessary that
milk-sugar be present in order later to have the lactic acid develop.

+233. The salts.+--Just what changes the salts[105] undergo or how they
combine with the other compounds is not definitely known. It is supposed
that the calcium salts first combine with the phosphates and later, as
the lactic acid is formed, they combine with the lactic acid, forming a
calcium lactate.

+234. Gases.+--In the process of cheese ripening, gases are formed, the
commonest being carbon dioxide.[106] Exactly how this gas is formed is
not known. It may be due to the formation of lactic acid from the
milk-sugar or to the living organisms in the cheese.

+235. Casein or proteins.+--Complex ripening changes in the cheese take
place in the casein compounds or proteins. Because of the complex
chemical nature of the proteins and the various agents acting on them,
it is difficult to follow these changes. This has led to different
opinions regarding the ripening process. The various compounds thought
to be formed from the casein or proteins are as follows:[107]

_Paracasein_ (formed by the action of the rennet on the casein).
Insoluble in brine and warm 5 per cent salt brine.

_Protein._ Soluble in warm 5 per cent salt brine.

_Protein._ Insoluble in warm salt brine or water.

_Paranuclein._ A protein soluble in water and precipitable by dilute
hydrochloric acid.

_Caseoses and proteoses._ Protein derivations soluble in water and not
coagulated by heat.

_Peptones._ Protein derivations simpler than the proteoses, soluble in
water and not coagulated by heat.

_Amido acids._ Protein derivations soluble in water, least complex
except ammonia.

_Ammonia._ The simplest protein derivations.

From the discussion of the constituents in the milk and cheese, it is
evident that practically all the principal ripening changes are
concerned with those taking place in the proteins.

+236. Causes of ripening changes.+--Authorities disagree as to the exact
agents which cause the ripening changes. Some think they are due to the
action of the enzymes in the rennet and those secreted in the milk.
Others hold that these changes are due entirely to bacterial action. A
combination of the two seems probable. The action of the rennet extract
renders the casein insoluble and in the ripening process the proteins
become soluble, the degree depending on the length of time the cheese is
ripened. The amount of water-soluble proteins and protein derivatives is
used as a measure of the extent of cheese ripening, considered from a
chemical standpoint.

+237. Action of the rennet extract.+--Some authorities hold that rennet
extract contains two enzymes, rennin and pepsin, while others think it
is a single peptic ferment. These enzymes produce effects[108] closely
related to, if not identical with, those of pepsin in the following
particulars: neither the rennet enzyme nor pepsin causes much, if any,
proteolytic change except in the presence of acid; the quantitative
results of proteolysis furnished by the rennet enzyme and pepsin agree
closely, when working on the same material under comparable conditions;
the classes of soluble nitrogen compounds formed by the two enzymes are
the same, both quantitatively and qualitatively; neither enzyme forms
any considerable amount of amido compounds and neither produces any
ammonia; the soluble nitrogen compounds formed by both enzymes are
confined to the group of compounds known as paranuclein, caseoses and
peptones.

Rennet exerts a digestive effect on the casein[109] which is intensified
by the development of acid in the curd. The soluble nitrogenous products
formed in Cheddar cheese by the rennet enzymes are the albumoses and the
higher peptones. Experiments show that no flavor develops until the
amido acids and ammonia are formed. When the rennet enzymes were the
only digesting ferments in the cheese, there was no trace of cheese
flavor. This is probably due to the fact that the rennet enzyme changed
the casein into caseoses and peptones but did not form amido acids and
ammonia. Some authorities[110] think that the enzyme galactase carries
the ripening of the protein from this stage. The question arises whether
these intermediate compounds must be found before other agents can form
the amido acids and ammonia.


  TABLE XV[111]

  SHOWING THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF RENEET
  EXTRACTS ON THE RATE OF FORMATION OF SOLUBLE
  NITROGEN COMPOUNDS IN CHEESE RIPENING

  =========================================================
                   | PER CENT OF WATER SOLUBLE NITROGEN
    QUANTITY OF    |      COMPOUNDS IN THE CHEESE
  RENNET ADDED PER +---------------------------------------
  1000 LB. OF MILK | Initial | 32 days | 80 days | 270 days
  -----------------+---------+---------+---------+---------
        2 oz.      |   0.14  |   0.47  |   0.68  |   1.30
        4 oz.      |   0.16  |   0.75  |   1.13  |   1.74
        8 oz.      |   0.16  |   0.90  |   1.50  |   1.97
       16 oz.      |   0.14  |   1.26  |   1.70  |   2.04
  =========================================================

The above table shows that the more rennet extract used the faster the
cheese cures, measured by the amount of water-soluble nitrogen compounds
formed in the cheese.

+238. The action of the bacteria.+--Authorities[112] disagree as to the
groups of bacteria found in Cheddar cheese. This may be due to lack of
proper classification. Some of the groups are: _Bacterium lactis acidi_,
_B. coli communis_, _B. lactis aerogenes_, _B. casei_, Streptococci,
_B.[113] Bulgaricum_ and Micrococci. Authorities agree that the _B.
lactis acidi_ group is the most prominent. This group makes up 90 per
cent or more of the total bacteria flora of the cheese in the early
stages of ripening. In the course of a few weeks, however, this group is
largely replaced by the _B. casei_ group[114].


  TABLE XVI

  SHOWING THE NUMBER OF BACTERIA TO A GRAM IN CHEDDAR
  CHEESE AS DETERMINED BY LACTOSE-AGAR PLATE CULTURES

  ====================================================================
   TIME OF |                       CHEESE NUMBER
   PLATING +-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
           |     580     |      581      |     582     |     583
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  Milk     |   8,000,000 |       500,000 |     700,000 |       500,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  Curd at  |             |               |             |
  salting  | 160,000,000 |   326,000,000 | 912,000,000 |   839,000,000
  time     |             |               |             |
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  12 hours | 332,000,000 | 1,048,000,000 | 623,000,000 |   965,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  1 day    | 586,000,000 |   736,000,000 | 709,000,000 |   569,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  2 days   | 235,000,000 |   405,000,000 | 848,000,000 |   580,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  4 days   | 145,000,000 |   684,000,000 | 522,000,000 | 1,025,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  6 days   | 165,000,000 |   184,000,000 | 853,000,000 |   184,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  14 days  |  51,000,000 |   211,000,000 | 369,000,000 |   401,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  21 days  | 284,000,000 |   290,000,000 | 348,000,000 |   319,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  28 days  | 285,000,000 |   453,000,000 | 314,000,000 |   144,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  35 days  | 104,000,000 |   261,000,000 | 326,000,000 |   504,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  49 days  | 132,000,000 |   228,000,000 | 436,000,000 |   661,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  70 days  | 128,000,000 |   291,000,000 | 193,000,000 |   168,000,000
  ---------+-------------+---------------+-------------+--------------
  98 days  | 114,000,000 |   212,000,000 |  45,000,000 |    55,000,000
  ====================================================================

  From Wis. Bul. 150.

The large number of bacteria in the cheese is very striking. The number
as given in the accompanying table is not that actually in the cheese,
as it is very difficult to obtain the sample in suitable condition for
plating.[115]

The principal action of the lactic acid-forming bacteria in the cheese
ripening is the changing of the milk-sugar or lactose into lactic acid
and the formation of small amounts of other substances, such as acetic,
succinic and formic acids, alcohol, aldehydes and esters and some gases,
carbon dioxide and hydrogen. While the amount of these substances other
than lactic acid is small, it is thought that the effect of these on the
cheese may be important. Heinemann shows[116] that lactic acid exists in
two optical modifications, the levorotatory and dextrorotary acids. In
cheese they are usually found in the inactive or racemic form, the
levorotatory and dextrorotary acids being present in equal amounts. What
importance the question of optical activity of the lactic acid may
assume is not definitely known. Just as some groups of bacteria have a
specific effect on the lactose, producing only one modification of
lactic acid, so bacteria attacking lactic acid may exercise a selective
action and use only one or the other optically active modification. In
other words, the early flora of cheese-ripening bacteria may determine
the later flora by the production of a form of lactic acid attacked by
one group of bacteria and not by another, and the effect on the flavor
will differ accordingly. The amount of lactic acid in the cheese
increases for a time, then decreases.

The errors in determining lactic acid are considerable. It seems that
the tendency is toward an increase of lactic acid in the cheese long
after the lactose has disappeared. Two explanations are offered: one,
that in the lactic acid fermentation an intermediate compound or
compounds are formed which exist for some time, the conversion into
lactic acid being complete at about three months; the other is that
lactic acid is formed as a product of paracasein proteolysis.

The lactic acid formed in cheese ripening does not exist in a free state
but reacts with the calcium salts in the cheese and forms calcium
lactates. It is thought that there is sufficient of these salts to
neutralize all the acid formed, and therefore the acid does not enter
into combination with the paracasein salts. It has been found that
lactates are the principal source of acetic and propionic acids. These
are supposed to have some effect on the flavor of the cheese.

The effect of lactic acid as a determinant of bacterial and enzymic
changes is very important. Early in the ripening process, lactic acid
suppresses the growth of undesirable micro-organisms. It also furnishes
the acid medium necessary for the best action of both the coagulating
and peptic enzymes.

The importance of the lactic acid bacteria in cheese ripening has been
summed up by Hastings[117] as follows: "The functions of this group of
bacteria in Cheddar cheese are through their by-product lactic acid as
follows: (_a_) To favor the curdling of milk by rennet. (_b_) The
bacteria of the milk are held in great part in the curd. Through the
acid they influence the shrinkage of the curd and expulsion of the whey,
(_c_) The acid so changes the nature of the curd as to cause 'matting,'
or 'cheddaring' of the curd, (_d_) The acid activates the pepsin of the
rennet extract, (_e_) The acid prevents the growth of putrefactive
bacteria in the cheese. (_f_) It has been shown that _Bacterium lactis
acidi_ is able to form acid in the absence of the living cell. (_g_) The
development of _Bacterium lactis acidi_ is followed by the growth of
another group of acid-forming bacteria, the _Bacillus Bulgaricus_ group.
They reach numbers comparable with those of the first group, reaching
their maximum number within the first month of ripening. Since they
develop after the fermentation of the milk-sugar, they must have some
other source of carbon and of energy than milk-sugar." It is also
probable that other groups constantly present contribute to the changes.

From the preceding discussion it is evident that each of the ripening
agents has its important part to play in the ripening process and a
normal ripening of the cheese is a composite result of these various
agencies.

+239. Conditions affecting the rate of cheese ripening.+--The rate at
which these agents cause ripening of the cheese depends on several
factors.[118] Most of these factors are within the control of man. They
are as follows: the length of time; temperature of the curing-room;
moisture-content of the cheese; size of the cheese; the quantity of salt
used; the amount of rennet; the influence of acid.

+240. The length of time.+--The water-soluble nitrogen compounds
increase as the cheese ages, other conditions being uniform. The rate of
increase is not uniform; it is much more rapid in the early than in the
succeeding stages of ripening.

+241. The temperature of the curing-room.+--Very few cheese factories
have made any provision for regulating the temperature of the
curing-room. Without such provision the temperature follows closely that
of the outside air. In some cases the curing-room is located over the
boiler-room and hence becomes very hot. In the cheese warehouses,
provision has been made to control the temperature very closely.
Experiments show that the soluble nitrogen compounds increase, on the
average, closely in proportion to an increase of temperature, when the
other conditions are uniform.

The temperature of the curing-room has a material effect on the quality
of the cheese. Cheese made from the same day's milk, and part cured at
40° F., part at 50° F., part at 60° F. show considerable differences,
the greatest seeming to be in the flavor and texture. Those kept at the
low temperature cure more slowly and develop a milder flavor, those at
the higher temperature cure faster and develop undesirable flavors. At
the higher temperature the undesirable organisms seem to be more active.
Some very skillful makers and judges of cheese have always contended
that if Cheddar is properly made, firmed to the body and texture of a
high-class cheese, ripening at 55 to 60° F. gives a higher quality. Such
a cheese must be low in moisture, perhaps 3 to 5 per cent lower than one
cured successfully by the cold process.

The following tables[119] XVII, XVIII show the effect of different
temperatures of curing cheese on the total score and on the points of
the flavor, body and texture:


  TABLE XVII

  TABLE SHOWING THE RELATION OF TEMPERATURE OF CURING
  TO TOTAL SCORE

  ==========================================
  TEMPERATURE OF CURING | TOTAL SCORE
  ----------------------+-------------------
          40°           |     95.7
          50°           |     94.2
          60°           |     91.7
  ==========================================


  TABLE XVIII

  TABLE SHOWING THE RELATION OF TEMPERATURE OF CURING
  TO SCORE OF BODY AND TEXTURE, AND FLAVOR

  =================================================
  TEMPERATURE OF CURING | 40° F. | 50° F. | 60° F.
  ----------------------+--------+--------+--------
  Body and texture      |  23.4  |  32.0  |  22.2
  Flavor                |  47.4  |  46.4  |  44.8
  =================================================

Of the three temperatures of curing, the lowest gave a higher total
score and a higher score for flavor, body and texture.

The curing temperature should not go low enough to freeze the cheese, as
this lowers the quality. The cheese will cure very slowly and have a
mealy texture.

+242. Moisture-content of the cheese.+--Other conditions being equal,
there is a larger amount of water-soluble nitrogen compounds in cheese
containing more moisture than in that containing less moisture.
Therefore, a high moisture-content of the cheese causes it to cure
faster. The presence of moisture also serves to dilute the fermentation
products which otherwise would accumulate and thus check the action of
the ripening agents.

+243. The size of the cheese.+--Cheeses of large size usually cure
faster than smaller ones, under the same conditions. This is due to the
fact that the large cheeses lose their moisture less rapidly by
evaporation and therefore after the early period of ripening have a
higher water-content.

+244. The amount of salt.+--The relation of salt to the rate of ripening
is more or less directly associated with the moisture-content of the
cheese, since an increase in the amount of salt decreases the moisture.
Thus, cheese containing more salt forms water-soluble nitrogen compounds
more slowly than that containing less salt. The salt also has a direct
effect in retarding one or more of the ripening agents.

+245. The amount of rennet extract.+--The use of increased amounts of
rennet extract in cheese-making, other conditions being uniform, results
in the production of increased quantities of soluble nitrogen compounds
in a given period of time, especially such compounds as paranuclein,
caseoses and peptones.

+246. The influence of acid.+--It is necessary that acid be present but
the exact relation of varying quantities of acid to the chemical changes
of the ripening process is not fully known. If too much acid is present,
it imparts a sour taste to the cheese. It also causes the texture of the
cheese to be mealy or sandy instead of smooth and waxy.

Conditions that may increase the rate of ripening:

  1. Increase of temperature.
  2. Larger amounts of rennet.
  3. More moisture in the cheese.
  4. Less salt.
  5. Large size of the cheese.
  6. Moderate amount of acid.

Conditions that may retard ripening:

  1. Decrease of temperature.
  2. Smaller amounts of rennet.
  3. Less moisture in the cheese.
  4. More salt.
  5. Small size of the cheese.
  6. No acid or an excess of acid.

+247. Care of the cheese in the curing-room.+--The cheeses need daily
attention while in the curing-room (Fig. 53). They should be turned
every day to prevent sticking and molding to the shelf and to secure an
even evaporation of moisture. If not turned, the moisture will not
evaporate evenly from all surfaces and will result in an uneven
distribution in the cheese, which causes uneven curing, and usually
gives the product an uneven color.

The surface of the cheese should be watched to see that the cloths
stick. If they do not, the surface will crack, due to the evaporation of
the moisture. If the cloths are loosened, they should be removed and the
surface of the cheese greased with butter. The grease will tend to
prevent the rind from cracking. If the surface of the cheese is not
smooth, due to wrinkles in the bandage, or if it cracks, due to the lack
of cloths, it furnishes the opportunity for insects to lay their eggs
and the larvæ to develop within the cheese. Molds also lodge and grow in
such cracks.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--Cheddar cheese curing-room.]

The cheese should be kept clean while in the curing-room. This means
that the hands of the person handling the cheese must be clean. The
shelves should be washed with good cleaning solution and scalded with
hot water whenever they become greasy or moldy.

Some means should be provided for regulating the temperature and
humidity of the curing-room. In most factories this is accomplished by
opening the doors and windows at night to admit the cool air and closing
them in the morning to keep out the hot air. Care should be taken to
keep the doors and windows closely secured. The windows should have
shades to keep out the sun. If the room becomes too dry, the floor may
be dampened with cold water.

The length of time in the curing-room depends on how often shipment is
made to some central warehouse or to the market. This usually varies
from two to six weeks.

When the surface of the cheese becomes dry and the rind is well formed,
the cheese may be paraffined. It usually requires four to six days after
cheeses are taken from the hoop before they are ready for this process.
The object of paraffining is to prevent the escape of moisture and to
keep the cheese from molding.

+248. Evaporation of moisture from the cheese during ripening.+--The
losses due to evaporation while the cheeses are curing are a
considerable item. The rate of evaporation depends on the temperature
and humidity of the curing-room, the size of the cheese, the
moisture-content and protection to the surface.

Table XIX[120] shows the effect of size of cheese and temperature of the
curing-room, on losses while curing. This table shows that the
evaporation of moisture is more as the size of the cheese decreases and
the temperature is increased. This is probably due to the fact that the
smaller cheese has more surface to a pound than a large cheese. The
evaporation increases with temperature, probably because of lowered
relative humidity. The humidity can be tested with an hygrometer.


  TABLE XIX

  SHOWING THE VARIATION OF LOSSES IN WEIGHT OF CHEDDAR
  CHEESE WHILE CURING, DUE TO SIZE OF CHEESE AND TEMPERATURE
  OF CURING-ROOM

  =============================================================
                   | WEIGHT LOST PER 100 POUNDS OF CHEESE IN 20
  WEIGHT OF CHEESE |                   WEEKS AT
     IN POUNDS     +---------------+--------------+------------
                   |     40° F.    |    50° F.    |    60° F.
  -----------------+---------------+--------------+------------
        70         |     2.5       |    2.4       |    4.2
        45         |     2.7       |    3.7       |    5.1
        35         |     3.9       |    5.9       |    8.5
        12½        |     4.6       |    8.1       |   12.0
  =============================================================

The higher the moisture-content of the cheese, usually the more rapid is
the evaporation. This is due to several causes: there is more moisture
to evaporate; the moisture is not so well incorporated; a moist cheese
does not form so good a rind.

249. +Paraffining+[121] consists of dipping the cheese in melted
paraffin at a temperature of about 220° F. for six seconds. Fig. 54
shows an apparatus for paraffining. This leaves a very thin coat of
paraffin on the cheese; at a lower temperature, a thicker coat would be
left. The thicker coating is more liable to crack and peel off. If the
cheese is not perfectly dry before it is treated, the paraffin will
blister and crack off.

Before a cheese is paraffined, the press cloth is removed and also the
starched circles, if loose. After a cheese has been paraffined, if the
coating is not broken, the loss due to evaporation is greatly reduced.
The amount of paraffin to coat a 35-pound cheese will depend on the
temperature of the paraffin and the length of time the cheese is
immersed. Usually at 220° F. it requires about 0.15 of a pound for each
35-pound cheese. After the cheeses have been paraffined, they may be
left on the curing-room shelves or boxed ready to ship.

[Illustration: FIG. 54.--A paraffiner for cheese.]

+250. Shipping.+--When ready to ship, each cheese should be carefully
and accurately weighed and boxed. Usually these cheeses are boxed after
being paraffined. If press cloths are left on the cheese in the
curing-room, they should be removed just before weighing. These cloths
should not be left in a pile in the factory after being removed as they
have been known to heat and sometimes cause fires. They should be washed
clean and dried ready for use again. If starched circles are used, they
should be left on the cheese. A scale board should be placed on each end
of the cheese to prevent its sticking to the box and also to keep the
box from wearing the surface of the cheese.

The box should be a trifle larger in diameter than the cheese so that
the latter can be easily placed in it. The sides of the box should be
the same height as the cheese.

The weight of each cheese should be neatly and accurately marked on each
box. Care should be exercised to keep the boxes clean.


DEFECTS IN CHEDDAR CHEESE

A great number of defects may occur in Cheddar cheese. Certain of these
are due to known causes and proper remedies are definable, while neither
cause nor remedy has been found for other defects. Some of the common
defects and their causes and remedies are discussed under different
headings of the score-card as: defects in flavor, their causes and
remedies; defects in body and texture, their causes and remedies;
defects in color, their causes and remedies; defects in finish and their
causes and remedies.

+251. Defects in flavor.+--Any flavor differing from the characteristic
Cheddar cheese is a defect. Certain of these defective flavors can be
recognized and causes and remedies given for them, while others may be
distinguished as such but no cause or remedy can be given.

+252. Feedy flavors.+--Flavors may be characteristic of certain feeding
stuffs. Feeding strong-flavored foods, such as turnips, cabbage, decayed
silage, certain weeds and sometimes rank green feed, give their peculiar
flavors to both milk and cheese. Freshly drawn milk usually absorbs
these odors from the air in barns filled with such foods. Certain of
these materials may be fed just after milking in moderate amounts
without affecting the milk drawn at the next milking. Others should not
be used. Milk should not be exposed to strong volatile odors. Some of
the objectionable odors may be removed by airing the curd for a longer
time after milling before the salt is applied.

+253. Acid flavors.+--A cheese with an acid flavor has a pronounced sour
smell and taste. This is caused by the over-development of acid which
may be due to any of the following causes: (_a_) receiving milk at the
factory which is sour or has too high development of acid; (_b_) using
too much starter; (_c_) ripening the milk too much before adding rennet;
(_d_) not firming the curd sufficiently in the whey before removing the
latter; (_e_) developing too much acid in the whey before it is removed;
(_f_) retaining too much moisture in the curd.

The trouble can be reduced or eliminated by one or more of the following
precautions: (_a_) receiving only clean, sweet milk at the cheese
factory; (_b_) maintaining the proper relation between the moisture and
acidity; (_c_) adding the rennet at the proper acidity; (_d_) using less
starter; (_e_) adding the rennet extract so that there will be
sufficient time to firm the curd before the acid has developed to such a
stage that it will be necessary to draw the whey; (_f_) producing the
proper final water-content in the newly made cheese.

+254. Sweet or fruity flavors.+--These are the sweet flavors
characteristic of strawberry, raspberry and the like. Such flavors are
very objectionable and usually increase with the age of the cheese. They
appear to be caused by: (_a_) carrying both milk and whey in the same
cans without properly cleaning them; (_b_) exposing milk near hog-pens
where whey is fed; (_c_) dirty whey tanks at the cheese factory; (_d_)
micro-organisms which get into the milk through any unclean conditions.

These troubles can be controlled: (_a_) if milk and whey must be carried
in the same cans, the cans should be emptied immediately on arrival at
the farm and thoroughly washed and scalded; (_b_) the whey vat at the
factory should be kept clean and sweet; (_c_) the starter must have the
proper clean flavor.

Other defects may be classed as "off flavors," "dirty flavors," "bitter
flavors" and the like. These are undoubtedly due to unsanitary
conditions whereby undesirable organisms get into the milk, even though
the particular organism is often not determined. The flavors may be
improved by the use of a clean-flavored commercial starter and by airing
the curd after milling before salting. The best remedy is to remove the
source of the difficulty.

+255. Defects in body and texture.+--The body and texture should be
close. A sample rubbed between the thumb and fingers should be smooth
and waxy. Any condition which causes a body and texture other than this
is to be avoided.

+256. Loose or open texture.+--A cheese with this defect is full of
irregularly shaped holes and usually soft or weak-bodied. This is
serious if the cheese is to be held for some time. Moisture and fat are
likely to collect in these holes and cause the cheese to deteriorate,
thereby shortening its commercial life.

Several causes may bring about this condition: (_a_) insufficient
cheddaring; (_b_) pressing at too high a temperature; (_c_) inadequate
pressing; (_d_) development of too little acid.

The corresponding remedies are: (_a_) cheddar the curd until the holes
are closed and the curd is solid; (_b_) cool the curd to 80° F. before
putting to press; (_c_) press the curd longer, possibly twenty-four to
twenty-six hours; (_d_) develop a little higher acid in the whey before
removing the curd.

+257. Dry body.+--A cheese with this defect is usually firm, hard and
dry, sometimes rubbery or corky. This may result from lack of moisture,
fat or both, and may be due to the following causes: (_a_) making the
cheese from partly skimmed-milk; (_b_) heating the curd in the whey for
too long a time; (_c_) heating the curd too high; (_d_) stirring the
curd too much in the whey or as the last of the whey is removed; (_e_)
using too much salt; (_f_) developing of too much acid in the whey;
(_g_) curing the cheese in too hot or too dry a curing-room; (_h_) not
piling the curd high or fast enough in the cheddaring process.

The cause should be located and the corresponding remedy found, as
follows: (_a_) make cheese only from whole milk; (_b_) draw the whey
sooner; (_c_) firm the curd at as low temperature as possible in the
whey; (_d_) stir the curd in the whey only enough to keep the curd
particles separated but do not hand-stir it; (_e_) use less salt; (_f_)
develop less acid in the whey; (_g_) cure the cheese in a cool moist
curing-room; (_h_) pile the curd sooner and higher during the cheddaring
process.

The number of causes which may singly or in combination produce dry
cheese demands experience and technical skill that calls for the
development of a high degree of judgment.

+258. Gassy textured cheese.+--Gassy cheese has large numbers of very
small round or slightly flattened holes. When round these are called
"pin-holes," and when slightly flattened "fish eye" openings. These are
due to the formation of gas by the micro-organisms in the cheese. When a
cheese is gassy, it usually puffs up from gas pressure as in the rising
of bread. If enough gas is formed, it will cause the cheese to break or
crack open. Instead of being flat on the ends, such a cheese becomes so
nearly spherical as to roll from the shelf at times.

The gas-producing organisms enter because of unclean conditions
somewhere in the handling of the milk and the making of the cheese.
Some of the common sources of gas organisms are: (_a_) unclean milkers;
(_b_) dirty cows; (_c_) aërating the milk in impure air, especially air
from hog-pens where the whey is fed; (_d_) allowing the cows to wade in
stagnant water or in mud or in filthy barnyards and then not thoroughly
cleaning the cows before milking; (_e_) exposing the milk to the dust
from hay and feed; (_f_) dirty whey tanks; (_g_) drawing milk and whey
in the same cans without afterward thoroughly washing them; (_h_)
unclean utensils in the factory; (_i_) using gassy starter; (_j_)
ripening cheese at high temperatures.

Some of these causes are within the control of the cheese-maker after
the making process is begun. Many of them are avoided only by eternal
vigilance. Among the recommendations for meeting gassy curd are the
following: use only milk produced under clean sanitary conditions; use a
clean commercial starter.

If gas is suspected in the milk, a larger percentage of commercial
starter should be used. More acid must be developed before the whey is
removed. If the gas shows while cheddaring, the curd should be piled and
repiled until the holes flatten out before milling.

The curd should be kept warm during the piling or cheddaring process.
This may be accomplished by covering the vat and setting a pail or two
of hot water in it. After milling, the curd should be stirred and aired
for a considerable length of time before salting. This will aërate the
curd and allow it to cool. The cheese should then be placed in a cool
curing-room. (See handling of gassy milk.)

+259. Acidy, pasty or soft body and texture.+--A cheese with acidy body
may be either hard and dry or soft and moist. It has a mealy or sandy
feeling when rubbed between the fingers. The causes and remedies are the
same as for cheeses with acid flavors. When rubbed between the fingers,
it is pasty and sticks to the fingers. It is caused by the cheese
containing too much water. (See control of moisture.)

+260. Defects in color.+--Any color which is not uniform is a defect.
The proper color depends on the market requirement. Some markets prefer
a white and others a yellow cheese; however, if the color is uniform, it
is not defective.

_Mottled color_ is a spotted or variegated marking of the cheese.
Several causes may give the same general effect: (_a_) uneven
distribution of moisture, the curd having extra moisture being lighter
in color; (_b_) neglecting to strain the starter; (_c_) adding the
starter after the cheese color has been added; (_d_) mixing the curd
from different vats.

Remedies for this mottled color are: (_a_) to maintain a uniform
assimilation of moisture (see discussion of moisture); (_b_) to strain
the starter to break up the lumps before adding to the milk; (_c_) to
add all of the starter before adding the cheese color; (_d_) not to mix
curds from different vats.

_Seamy color._--In "seamy" colored cheese, the outline of each piece of
curd may be seen. There is usually a line where the surfaces of the curd
come together. It may be caused by the pieces of curd becoming greasy or
so cold that they will not cement. This may be remedied by having the
curd at a temperature of 80° to 85° F. when put to press. If it is
greasy, this may be removed by washing the curd in cold water.

_Acid color._--This is a bleached or faded color and is caused by the
development of too much acid. (See acid flavor for causes and remedies,
page 266.)

+261. Defects in finish.+--Defects of this class differ from those
previously mentioned in being entirely within the control of the
cheese-maker. All are due to carelessness or lack of skill in
manipulation. Anything which detracts from the neat, clean, workmanlike
appearance of the cheese is a defect that may interfere with the sale of
an article intrinsically good. Some of the common defects are: (_a_)
unclean surfaces or dirty cheese; (_b_) cracked rinds; (_c_) moldy
surfaces; (_d_) uneven sizes; (_e_) cracked cheese; (_f_) wrinkled
bandages; (_g_) uneven edges.


CHEDDAR CHEESE JUDGING

Judging of cheese is the comparison of the qualities of one product with
those of another. To make this easier it is customary to reduce the
qualities of the cheese to a numerical basis. This is accomplished by
the use of a score-card, which recognizes certain qualities and gives to
each a numerical value. Each of these score-cards gives a perfect cheese
a numerical score of 100. Two score-cards are used to judge cheese, one
for export and the other for home-trade product. The latter is more
commonly used.

  EXPORT SCORE-CARD       HOME-TRADE SCORE-CARD

  Flavor            45    Flavor             50
  Body and texture  30    Body and texture   25
  Color             15    Color              15
  Finish            10    Finish             10
                   ---                      ---
    Total          100      Total           100

The same qualities are recognized in each score-card, but different
numerical values are given them.

+262. Securing the sample.+--The sample of cheese to be examined is best
obtained by means of a cheese-trier (Fig. 55). This is a piece of steel
about five or six inches long fitted with a suitable handle. It is
semicircular in shape, about ½ to ¾ of an inch in diameter. The
edges and end are sharpened to aid in cutting. This is inserted into the
cheese and turned around and then drawn out. It removes a long cylinder
of cheese, commonly called a "plug." This plug should be drawn from the
top rather than from the side of the cheese, because when the bandage is
cut it often splits, due to the pressure against it and so exposes the
cheese.

[Illustration: FIG. 55.--A cheese-trier.]

+263. How to determine quality.+--As soon as the plug has been removed,
it should be passed quickly under the nose to detect any volatile odors
which are liable to leave the cheese quickly. Next, the compactness of
the plug should be noticed and the color carefully examined. Then the
outer end of the plug should be broken off and placed back in the cheese
in the hole made by the trier. It should be about an inch long and
pushed in so that the surface of the cheese is smooth. This prevents
mold and insects entering the cheese. Usually the cheese will mold after
a short time where the plug has been removed. The remainder of the plug
should be saved for determining the flavor and the body and texture.

The flavor can be determined by the first odor obtained from the cheese
on the trier and by mixing or crushing a piece of the plug between the
thumb and fore-finger and then noting the odor. Mixing and thoroughly
warming causes the odor to be much more pronounced. The cheese should
seldom be tasted to determine the flavor, for when many are to be
judged, they all taste alike after the first five or six. This is
probably due to the cheese adhering to the teeth, tongue and other parts
of the mouth, making it difficult to cleanse the mouth sufficiently. The
body and texture can be determined by the appearance and the feeling of
the cheese when rubbed between the thumb and fingers. The body and
texture are distinct, yet they are more or less interchanged. The body
refers to the cheese as a whole and the texture to the arrangement of
the parts of the whole. The openness of texture or the holes can be
noted when the plug is first removed. The firmness of body and
smoothness of texture can be determined when the cheese is rubbed
between the thumb and fingers. The color can be judged when the plug is
first removed. The finish or appearance may be noted either before or
after the other qualities by carefully examining the cheese.

Cheddar cheese should have a neat, clean, attractive appearance; when
cut it should show a close, solid, uniformly colored interior. It should
have a clear, pleasant, mild aroma and a nutty flavor. It should possess
a mellow, silky, meaty texture and when rubbed between the thumb and
fore-finger should be smooth and free from hard particles.


  CHEESE SCORE-CARD

  _Sample_................  _Date_......................

  ===============================================================
               SCORE                 REMARKS
  ---------+-----+----------+------------------------------------
  Flavor   |  50 | ........ |
           |     |          |
  Body and |     |          |
   Texture |  25 | ........ |
           |     |          |
  Color    |  15 | ........ |
           |     |          |
  Finish   |  10 | ........ |
  ---------+-----+----------+
  Total    | 100 | ........ |
  ---------+-----+----------+

  Recommendations................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................

  ...............................................................


                       Name of Judge.............................
  ---------------------------------------------------------------

  SUGGESTIVE TERMS

  FLAVOR

  _Desirable_

  Clean   Pleasant Aroma  Nutty Flavor

  _Undesirable_

  +Due to Farm Conditions+

  Weedy  Feedy  Cowy  Old Milk  Bitter

  +Due to Factory Conditions+

  Too much acid  Too little acid

  +Due to either Farm or Factory Conditions+

  Yeasty  Fruity  Fishy  Rancid  Sour  Bitter  Sweet  Tainted

  BODY AND TEXTURE

  _Desirable_

  Smooth  Waxy  Silky  Close

  _Undesirable_

  Pasty  Corky  Acidy  Greasy  Loose  Sweet  Curdy
  Gassy  Watery  Mealy  Lumpy  Yeasty  Too dry

  COLOR

  _Desirable_

  Uniform

  _Undesirable_

  Streaked  White specks  Seamy  Mottled  Wavy  Rust spots
  Acid cut  Too high  Too light

  FINISH

  _Desirable_

  Clean surfaces  Neat bandage  Attractive

  _Undesirable_

  Wrinkled bandage  Unclean surfaces  Cracked rinds
  Undesirable size  Greasy  No end caps  Uneven edges

+264. Causes of variations in score.+--It is very seldom, if ever, that
a cheese is given a perfect score, for it usually has one or more
defects which may be hardly noticeable or very pronounced. The
seriousness of the defect is determined by the individual tastes of the
judges and the market requirements. It is customary for the judge to
pick out several samples and score them in order to fix the standard
and if there are several judges this serves to unify their standard.
Ordinarily judges will vary because of their individual tastes, unless
they begin with a uniform standard.

Certain markets require cheese with given qualities which on other
markets would be considered defects. For example, the Boston market
requires a very soft, pasty cheese which other markets would consider
undesirable.

The cheese is constantly undergoing changes due to the ripening agents
so that it may not always be scored the same. For example, a cheese may
have little or no flavor and after several weeks a very considerable
flavor may have developed. This is probably due to the action of the
ripening agents, and therefore the second time it would be scored
differently.

+265. The score-card.+--When judging several samples of cheese, the type
of score-card on the opposite page is used for each one.

This gives the date of judging and the sample number, the judge's name
and reasons for cutting the score and recommendations to avoid these
troubles.




CHAPTER XV

_THE SWISS AND ITALIAN GROUPS_


Certain varieties of hard cheese of foreign origin are now made to some
extent in this country. If not manufactured in sufficient quantities to
supply the demand, the remainder is imported. These hard cheeses are now
considered.


SWISS CHEESE

Swiss cheese, variously known as Gruyère, Emmenthal, Schweitzer and
Swiss, had its origin in the Alpine cantons of Switzerland. From this
region its manufacture has been carried by Swiss dairy-men and emigrant
farmers into widely separate lands. The Swiss colonies settled in the
United States in the Mohawk Valley and in Cattaraugus County, New York;
in Wayne, Stark, Summit, Columbiana and Tuscarawas counties of Ohio, and
in Green and Dodge counties in Wisconsin. Of all these, the Wisconsin
colonies have become the most extensive. Similar colonies have developed
the making of this type of cheese in Sweden and Finland.

+266. The Swiss factory.+--Swiss cheese cannot be made in a vat like
other types for reasons that will be explained later. In place of the
vat is used a kettle, generally of copper, and it may or may not be
jacketed for steam or for hot water (Fig. 56). These kettles vary in
capacity from 600 to 3000 pounds of milk. The cheese-maker takes the
best care possible of his kettle, for an unclean utensil is one of the
easiest sources of contamination of the milk. When the kettle is not
jacketed, and it is only in recent years that this has been done, it is
suspended in a fireplace by means of a crane arrangement.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Swiss-cheese kettle.]

This fireplace uses wood, and is built of brick or stone, so that the
kettle rests on the edge and is provided with a door which swings upon
another crane, and can be closed while the fire is going. When the
kettle is swung on a crane, it is possible to swing it under the
weigh-stand for filling. This requires a lid to swing down over the
fire, and keep the room free from smoke. The chimney generally has a
rather high stack to secure a good draft. This kettle is fastened to the
crane by a large iron band passing around the neck, to which a bail or
handle is attached. The kettle may be raised or lowered by means of a
simple screw on this beam. The crane consists of a heavy beam working in
sockets in the floor and a beam or cross brace, which has another and
shorter beam braced to it, to take the weight of the kettle.

The weigh-stand, and its efficient location, is a matter of extreme
importance. It is elevated a little above the remainder of the floor to
allow gravity to do the work. The next most important equipment is the
press and draining table. The table is made of wood or stone, and has a
slight slope to allow the whey to drain off. The press is generally a
jack screw which, braced against a beam, will exert an enormous pressure
on the table below.

Swiss cheeses are made in two styles, the "round" or drum and the
"block" or rectangular forms, each of which has its advantages. For the
round style, which is most commonly made, the forms for hooping are of
metal or of elm wood, and consist of strips of a given width, generally
six inches, but of an undetermined length. These strips are then made
into a circle and held by a cord, which is easily lengthened or
shortened, thus varying the diameter of the hoop.

Besides these hoops, cheese boards or followers are needed. These are
heavy circular boards, of a size to fit that of the cheese generally
made, and are banded with iron around the edge and cross-braced on the
bottom for rigidity. The small tools of the factory consist of knives to
cut the curd, and of a "Swiss harp" or other similar tool to stir the
curd. Many clean bandages are also needed, and a kettle brake.

+267. The milk.+--Swiss cheese requires clean sweet milk. Dirt, high
acid and infections with undesirable bacteria involve difficulties of
manufacture and frequent losses of cheese. One common practice rejects
milk if it shows acidity above 0.15 per cent. To secure milk in this
condition, factories are small and located so close to the producing
farms as to secure 1000 to 3000 pounds of milk delivered warm from the
cow twice a day. The cheese is made twice daily from this fresh milk.
If, however, milk is properly cared for, it is possible to mix night's
and morning's milk without bad results. In fact, in working
experimentally with high grade milk and taking precautions against loss
of fat, it has been necessary to skim (separate) part of the milk, thus
reducing the ratio of fat to casein. Analysis of good Swiss cheeses
shows that the desired texture is more uniformly obtained with milk in
which the fat is less than the normal ratio. This assumes that the
manufacturing loss is kept down so that the fat removed offsets the
extra loss from curd-breaking.

+268. Rennet extract.+--Most Swiss cheese-makers prefer to make their
own rennet extract from the stomach. This results in a product which is
not uniform in strength and so requires good judgment to secure the
desired coagulation in the allotted time. Some cheese-makers roll
fifteen to twenty well salted calves' stomachs together and dry them.
From this they cut off a definite amount each day to be soaked for
twenty-four hours in two to five quarts of whey at 86° F. Four quarts of
this solution added to 2000 pounds of milk at 90° F. should produce a
curd ready for cutting in twenty to thirty minutes.

+269. Starter.+--Makers do not agree as to the use of "starters" for
Swiss cheese. Those opposed to such use say that a starter will give the
cheese a decided Cheddar flavor, while those in favor of it state that
it will control undesirable fermentations, and that, with the use of a
starter, it is possible to make Swiss cheese throughout the year, and
have uniform success.

Doane,[122] working with _Bacillus Bulgaricus_ as a starter, found that
these starters did not always overcome the undesirable fermentations. If
a cheese-maker is having difficulty to develop the holes or "eyes," this
may be overcome by making a starter[123] as follows from good cheese and
whey or milk: Select a cheese which has the desirable "eyes" or holes
and a good flavor. Grind up some of this and add about ¼ of a pound
to one gallon of milk or whey. Hold this for twenty-four hours at a warm
temperature (85° to 90° F.). Strain it into the vat of milk just before
the rennet is added.

+270. The making process.+--The milk is delivered twice a day without
cooling. It usually reaches the factory at a temperature of 92° to 96°
F. It is strained into the kettle, and starter and rennet added at the
same temperature as received. (For method of adding rennet, see Chapter
V.) Enough rennet should be used to give a coagulation ready for cutting
in twenty to thirty minutes. The firmness of the curd is tested by
inserting the index finger in an oblique position, then raising it
slightly and with the thumb of the same hand starting the curd to break
or crack. When the curd is coagulated ready for cutting, it will give a
clear break over the finger.

It is important to keep the temperature uniform while coagulation is in
process, and this is best accomplished by the use of a little pan
arrangement which fits into the top of the kettle. When this is full of
water at 100° F., the temperature of the air above the milk will be
about 90° F. When the curd is ready for cutting, a scoop may be used and
the top layer carefully turned under to equalize the temperature more
closely.

_Cutting the curd._--In some cheese factories, knives resembling Cheddar
cheese knives are employed to cut the curd. In other factories, a "Swiss
harp" is used to break the curd. The curd is usually cut or broken into
pieces about the size of kernels of corn. The practice of "breaking"
curd instead of cutting it with sharp curd-knives produces excessive
loss at times. Experimental study has shown that the loss of fat may be
kept as low as 0.3 per cent if modern curd-knives are substituted for
the breaking tool formerly used. Study of Swiss cheeses of all grades
supports the opinion that the removal of a small part of fat from usual
grades of factory milk produces a better quality of product than the use
of rich whole milk. This may be accomplished through the escape of fat
in the whey on account of breaking the curd and stirring it vigorously,
or by skimming a part of the milk which is then curdled, cut and stirred
under such conditions as to minimize the loss of fat.

_Cooking the curd._--After cutting, the curd is stirred in the whey for
about twenty minutes before the steam is turned on and is then heated to
128° to 135° F. While this heating is in progress, constant stirring
must be given to avoid matting. This excessive stirring breaks the curd
up into pieces about the size of wheat kernels, and accounts for the
large fat loss, which is one of the main sources of loss in making Swiss
cheese. This stirring is accomplished by a rotary motion, and the use of
a brake, which is a piece of wood closely fitting the side of the
kettle. This creates an eddy in the current at that point and gives a
more uniform distribution of temperature. The process of cooking takes
from thirty to forty minutes, and at the end of that time the degree of
toughness may be determined by making a roll of curd in the hand, and
noticing the break when it is given a quick flip. A short sharp break
indicates the desired toughness.

_Draining and hooping._--In this process, the cheese-makers' skill is
displayed. With the hoop prepared, and the curd at the correct stage of
toughness, the operator takes a press cloth, wets it in whey, slips it
over a flexible iron ring which can be made to fit the shape of the
kettle, gives the contents of the kettle a few swift revolutions, then
suddenly reverses the motion, with the result that the contents form
into a cone, and the ring and bandage are dexterously slipped under this
cone, and drawn up to the surface of the whey with a rope or chain and
pulley. This part of the process is the most important, as a cheese must
have a smooth firm rind, else it will quickly crack. With too large a
batch of milk, the curd can be cut into two pieces and hooped
separately. With the mass of curd at the top of the whey, the piece of
perforated iron plate just the size of the hoop is slipped under the
mass, and attached to the pulley by four chains. Then the top of the
mass is carefully leveled off, because while still in the whey, it
cannot mat badly and so tend to develop a rind crack. Now the mass is
raised clear of the whey, and run along a short track to the drain
table, where it is put in the press.

_Pressing._--The mass of curd is dropped into the hoop, the edges of the
cloth carefully folded under, and the cloth laid on top, then the
pressure is applied, gradually at first, but increasing until the final
pressure is about fifteen to twenty pounds to a pound of cheese.

During the first few hours the cloths must be changed frequently, and
the cheese carefully turned over each time, to secure a more uniform
rind. After a time the changes are less frequent, and at the end of
twenty-four hours the cheese is taken to the salting-room.

_Salting_ may be done by either the brine or dry method. To prepare a
brine bath, add salt to a tank of water until it will float an egg, and
add a pailful or more of salt every few days thereafter to keep up the
strength. The cheese is then placed in this bath and left for three to
five days, depending on the saltiness desired. As the cheese floats with
a little of the rind above the surface, it should be turned a few times
to insure uniformity of salting. With dry salting, the salt is rubbed on
the cheese by hand or with a stiff brush, and any excess carefully wiped
off, leaving only a slight sprinkle on the surface to work into the
cheese.

+271. Curing Swiss.+--From the salting-room, the cheese goes to the
first one of two curing-rooms, where the unique process of the
development of the characteristic eyes takes place.

During the curing period of either round or block Swiss, constant
attention must be paid to the cheese. They must be turned every day at
first, and then every second or third day toward the end of the curing
period. Also, great care must be taken that no mold starts growing, as
it will soon work into the cheese, and spoil its flavor. The best way of
preventing mold is by washing the cheese, in either clean or slightly
salted water, as often as possible. A stiff brush is mostly used for
this.

The development of the "eyes" or holes is the difficult part of the
whole process. It is not known exactly what causes the development, but
it is attributed to micro-organisms or enzymes. The gas in these eyes
has been examined and found to be carbon dioxide and free nitrogen.
Sometimes hydrogen is found. This comes from the original fermentation
of the milk-sugar and remains to contaminate the normal eye. The
nitrogen[124] is included from the original air. Propionic acid is
formed at the same time as the eyes, and they are said to be the result
of a propionic ferment of lactic acid. The interior of the cheese is
anaërobic, due to low permeability and high oxygen-absorbing quality.
This propionic bacterium cannot, however, account for all the carbon
dioxide produced.

After the eyes have started, their further development depends on
temperature and humidity of the air, and on the moisture of the cheese,
as regulated by the amount of salt used. The first room has a
temperature of 70° F. to start the eyes, which is later lowered in the
second curing-room to about 60° to check the development. When any local
fermentive action starts, it may be checked by rubbing salt on the
affected part. The humidity of the room is very important, because a
cheese will quickly dry out in a dry room, due to evaporation from the
surface. To prevent this, it is well to spray the floor with water, or
to have a steam jet in the room.

If the curd has been cooked too long the cheese may be too dry. Such
cheeses may be piled two or more deep in the curing-room. It is held by
some cheese-makers that this process causes them to absorb more
moisture. Probably this is due to the checking of evaporation.

The development of the "eyes" may be watched by trying the following
test: Place the middle finger on the cheese and let the first finger
slip from it, striking the cheese smartly; a dull sound indicates
solidity, while a ring indicates a hole, and an expert maker can tell
the size of the holes by the sound. This requires long practice for the
operator to become proficient.

After a cheese has remained in the first room for about two weeks and
the holes are well started, it is removed to the second curing-room,
which is held at a cooler temperature and slightly drier atmosphere. The
cheeses are held in this room from three to ten months, depending on
market conditions, and capacity of the curing-rooms. In Switzerland, it
is customary to hold cheese to secure a well ripened product, while in
America most of the cheeses are shipped comparatively green, hence do
not bring so high a price.

+272. Block Swiss.+--In making block Swiss, the same procedure is
followed through the cooking stage. Then the curd is pressed in a square
form or in one large piece, each form six inches square on the ends and
twenty inches long, and later cut into sections. These are then pressed,
salted and cured in the same way as round forms. In this type of cheese
there is a much smaller cross-section; therefore the development of
holes is much more easily controlled on account of the ease with which
the salt can work into the cheese and control undesirable ferments. As
it is easy to control, this variety is made in the fall and winter when
the ferments are especially hard to keep in check. However, this cheese
has the disadvantage of cutting eye-development short by the rapid
entrance of salt.

The curing consists of the developing of the flavor and eyes and the
changing in body and texture. Just what causes these changes is not
known.

+273. Shipment.+--When ready for shipment, the drum cheeses of the same
general diameter are sorted out and packed four to six in a cask. Care
must be taken to put boards between them to prevent sticking. These are
called scale-boards, and are made of thin sections of wood fiber. The
cheeses are crowded into the cask to make a snug fit, and the head
carefully fastened.

+274. Qualities of Swiss cheese.+--The peculiar Swiss cheese flavor may
be characterized as a hazel-nut taste. It is a trifle sweet and very
tempting. The "eyes" or holes should be about the size of a cherry with
a dull shine to the inner lining. The "eyes" usually contain a small
amount of a briny tasting liquid. These eyes should be uniformly
distributed. The color should be uniform. The cheese should have a neat,
clean, attractive appearance, and the rind should not be cracked or
broken.

There are several common defects in Swiss cheese. If the milk is not
clean-flavored, the cheese will have the same flavor as the milk. The
greatest difficulty is to produce the eyes or holes. A cheese which does
not have these is called "blind." A product which has many small
pin-holes due to gassy fermentations is called a "niszler"; this means a
cheese with a thousand eyes. If gas forms in the cheese and causes
cracks, it is called "glaesler." If the cheese contains too much
moisture, it will be soft and pasty. Such a cheese does not readily form
eyes.

+275. Composition and yield.+--A large number of analyses of Swiss
cheese have been made but there is wide variation. This is due to the
fact that the composition and yield are both dependent on the following
factors: composition of the milk, losses during manufacture, amount of
moisture in the cheese. The losses in Swiss cheese are much larger than
with some of the other hard cheeses, such as Cheddar. This is because
more fat is lost in the whey, due to breaking instead of cutting the
curd and the subsequent hard stirring. The possibility of reducing these
excessive losses has already been indicated.

Swiss cheeses of high grade show about the following range of
composition:

  Water         30-34 per cent
  Fat           30-34 per cent
  Protein       26-30 per cent
  Ash           3-5 per cent
  Salt (NaCl)   1-1.4 per cent

The water-content of this type of cheese is low and the protein-content
is proportionately high. Both conditions lead to firm textures, long
ripening and long keeping periods.

The following score-card is used to judge both block and drum Swiss
cheese:

  Flavor                        35
  Appearance on trier holes     30
  Texture                       20
  Salt                          10
  Style                          5
                              ----
                               100

The yield of Swiss cheese varies from 8 to 11 pounds to 100 pounds of
milk. The more solids in the milk, the more moisture incorporated in
the cheese; the smaller the loss of solids in the manufacturing process,
the larger will be the yield from a given amount of milk.


THE ITALIAN GROUP[125]

A group of varieties, best known in America by Parmesan, are made in
Italy with related forms in Greece and European Turkey. These forms are
very hard, usually uncolored, with small eyes or holes. They are made in
large cheeses which ripen very slowly. Cow's milk is regularly used for
Parmesan and Grana in northern Italy; other varieties contain goat or
sheep milk or various mixtures. Aside from Parmesan, few of the other
forms are known outside the place of origin except as they are exported
in a small way to satisfy the demand of emigrants from these regions.

+276. Parmesan.+--One type of Italian cheese, however, the Parmesan, has
become very widely known. In general the consuming trade does not
discriminate between Parmesan, Grana and closely related forms. Parmesan
is made in large cheeses which require one to three years for proper
ripening; in texture it is very hard with small eyes or holes formed by
very slow fermentation. Such cheeses are ripened in large storehouses in
which hundreds and even thousands are brought together and cared for by
experts. The surfaces of these cheeses are kept clean and free from
insects by rubbing with linseed oil. So hard are these forms that the
cheese-trier is not used in testing, but the texture of the surface is
tested by pricking with an awl-like tool and the stage of eye-formation
and associated ripening is determined by the sound given out when the
cheeses are tapped with a hammer.

When ripe, the cheeses of this group are used in cooking principally.
The broken cheese is grated and added to macaroni, spaghetti and other
cooked cheese dishes. Parmesan is usually made from partly skimmed-milk;
the ratio of fat to protein in analysis runs from 1:2 to 3:4 in contrast
to the normal relation of about 4:3 in whole-milk cheese. In
water-content much variation is found, but ripe Parmesan is usually
about 30 per cent water. Other members of the group are made with
different amounts of skimming, some of them from whole milk. The group
in general represents the requirements of cheese for the trade of warmer
regions (see Mayo and Elling): (1) a low fat-content so incorporated
that the cheese does not become greasy or oily in hot weather; (2) a
water-content low enough to prevent rapid spoilage during the necessary
exposure of handling under warm conditions.

The equipment for Parmesan manufacture has more resemblance to that of
the Swiss factory than the English and American cheeses. The milk is
curdled in deep copper kettles (Fig. 57), below which there is commonly
a provision for direct heating by fire which is sometimes carried on a
truck, and therefore can be withdrawn when heating is sufficient. The
steam-jacketed kettle has replaced this earlier form to a large measure.

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Parmesan cheese kettles.]

The general character of the manufacturing process is indicated in the
following abstract of one of the methods. Many variations are to be
found. The milk for Parmesan is allowed to stand overnight. Some acidity
is, therefore, developed in contrast to the absolutely fresh condition
of the milk used in Swiss and the acidification developed during the
making of Cheddar (Fascetti). It is then skimmed, heated to 72° to 75°
F. Rennet is added in amount sufficient to produce firm curd in one hour
or slightly less. When the curd is firm, a wood fire is made under the
kettle and the curd is broken with a special implement into small
particles. After breaking, four grains of powdered sulfur to twenty-two
gallons of milk are added. The curd is stirred with a rake. By the time
the temperature rises to 77° F., the curd should be in very small
pieces. Stirring and heating continue until the temperature reaches 131°
F. At this temperature, it stands fifteen minutes, after which it is
removed from the fire (or the fire is drawn). Nine-tenths of the whey is
then drawn. The cheese-maker then collects the curd into a compact lump
under which he slips a cheese cloth. With the aid of an assistant he
removes the mass to a perforated vessel for draining. After this the
curd goes into large wooden hoops, lined with cloth, which stand upon a
slanting draining table until evening. No pressure is used. Before
night they are taken to the cellar. The cloths are removed next day.
After standing four days, they are salted by covering the upper surface
with coarse salt. This is repeated with daily turning for twenty days,
then salted on alternate days for another period of twenty days. At the
end of the forty days' salting, the cheese is removed from the hoop,
scraped, sprinkled with whey and the rind rubbed smooth. A dressing of
linseed oil either with or without bone black is applied.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--A typical cheese-market in France.]

The cheeses are kept in special ripening rooms, and rubbed frequently
with linseed oil to keep the surfaces free from molds and vermin.
Careful grading as to quality of product and consequent response to
ripening conditions produce cheeses of many degrees of excellence.
Those in which a ripening of three to four years is possible are most
highly esteemed.

+277. Regianito.+--A cheese of the Italian group is now made in
Argentina and imported to the United States under the name Regianito.




CHAPTER XVI

_MISCELLANEOUS VARIETIES AND BY-PRODUCTS_


As already discussed in Chapter VI, there are a large number of
varieties of cheese. Very many are entirely unknown in America. A
considerable number of forms are occasionally imported and may be found
by visiting the markets and delicatessen stores in the foreign districts
of our large cities. Certain forms not widely known are made in America
in a few factories or are imported in sufficient quantity to call for
brief discussion. Some of these are brought together here.

The importance of the by-products of cheese-making has not been
sufficiently recognized, for manufacture on a large scale is only
beginning to be appreciated in America. Certain cheese names, such as
Mysost, are applied to whey products. In addition, milk-sugar is
extensively made and whey-butter has been carefully studied and found to
be practicable under some conditions.

+278. Caciocavallo+ originated in Italy, but is now made in certain
factories of New York and Ohio. Some factories in Lombardy[126] use
whole milk, others use half-skimmed milk. The latter practice is
probably the more common. In making this cheese, the milk is coagulated
with rennet, cut and firmed in the whey, allowed to settle and the whey
drawn. The curd is then piled on the draining table and allowed to mat
or fuse into fairly solid masses. After several hours of draining and
matting, the curd is cut into strips and placed in a vat of hot water.
In the hot water, the blocks of solid curd melt into taffy-like masses
which are worked and molded by hand into more or less standard shapes.
Indian club or ten-pin forms are most commonly produced. When the proper
shape has been gained, each mass is thrown into cold water which
solidifies it in that form. Cheese masses heat and cool slowly; several
hours of cooling are required to insure a firm cheese. The newly made
cheeses are salted in a brine bath, then hung by a string to ripen.
Sometimes these cheeses are eaten fresh, again they are ripened several
months. They vary in size from one to six pounds. Cornalba gives the
composition of Italian Caciocavallo made from whole milk as water 32 to
34 per cent, fat 34 to 36 per cent, protein 28.5 to 29.5 per cent, salt
1.7 to 1.8 per cent; when made from half skimmed-milk, water 28 per
cent, fat 27 to 28 per cent, protein 35 to 40 per cent, salt 2.2 per
cent. Other analyses vary widely from these figures on account of the
differing fat-content of the milk. No standardized practice has been
established in America.

_Provolono_ resembles Caciocavallo in method of manufacture and
composition, the main difference being in the shape of the cheese. It is
more or less round and is held by a coarse net made of small rope. The
cheeses are treated while curing the same as Caciocavallo.

+279. Sap sago.+--This hard green cheese imported from Switzerland is
made in cakes, tapering from perhaps two inches in diameter to a rounded
top with a height of about two inches. These are made from skimmed-milk
curd, partially ripened then mixed with powdered leaves of _Melilotus
coeruleus_, a clover-like plant. The mixture is then pressed into the
market form and dried until very hard. It is handled without special
care since the water-content is so low that fermentations are
exceedingly slow. This low-priced cheese may be used in cooking.

+280. Albumin cheese.+[127]--In the rennet cheeses, the albumin, which
constitutes about 0.7 per cent of the milk, passes off in the whey. This
albumin is not curdled by rennet. It is, however, coagulated by heating.
The presence of acid hastens such coagulation but does not cause it when
used alone. When the whey is heated to about 200° F., the albumin rises
and may be skimmed off. In this form it is recovered and used. It may be
shaped is hoops under pressure, as Ricotte, an Italian form. This cheese
is pressed firmly and dried. Such albumin is frequently prepared as a
poultry feed.

+281. Mysost, Norwegian whey cheese.+--The whey contains nearly 5 per
cent of milk-sugar which can be recovered by boiling. The Norwegian
process which produces Mysost consists in raising the whey to the
boiling point, skimming off the albumin as it rises, then concentrating
the remainder of the whey. As it reaches sufficient concentration, the
albumin is thoroughly stirred back into the mass and the mass finally
cooled into forms. Mysost is a brown, hard brittle mass consisting
principally of caramelized milk-sugar. Analysis shows such percentage
composition as follows: water 10 to 20 per cent, protein 10 to 15 per
cent, milk-sugar 30 to 55 per cent. Mysost is found in the larger
markets of the United States.

_Primost_ is an albumin cheese somewhat similar to Ricotte and Mysost.
It is made by precipitating the albumin by acid and heat. The main
difference is in the firmness of the cheese. This is regulated by
drying.

+282. Whey butter.+[128]--The loss of a percentage of fat, rarely less
than 0.3 per cent and in some cheeses very much greater, has led to the
making of whey butter. For this purpose a separator is introduced and
all whey is separated daily. The fat recovered in the form of cream is
then ripened and churned. Whey butter is not rated as equal to butter
made from whole milk but a fair market can usually be found for the
product. The recovery of 0.25 per cent fat means two and one-half pounds
of fat to 1000 pounds of whey. This will make about three pounds of
butter.

Whether whey butter shall be made depends on the volume of business, the
extra equipment required, the extra help necessary and the market for
the product. As a rule, whey butter is economically recoverable only in
large factories. It is not considered advisable to attempt to make it
unless one has the whey from 10,000 pounds of milk. In some instances,
the combination of small cheese factories with one churning plant has
proved to be economical. The objection to the making of whey butter is,
that it stimulates carelessness on the part of the cheese-maker because
he thinks that the fat will be recovered by skimming. He does not
realize that the other milk solids are being reduced in the same
proportion as the fat, to the great loss in yield of cheese.




CHAPTER XVII

_CHEESE FACTORY CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT, ORGANIZATION_


The principal factor in determining the location of a cheese factory is
the available supply of milk. This is usually ascertained by making a
canvass, and finding out the number of cows whose milk would be brought
to the factory. The quantity of milk or the number of cows necessary to
insure sufficient milk for the successful operation of the factory,
depends on the variety of cheese to be made. When making types of cheese
for which very sweet milk is necessary, the milk must be delivered twice
a day. This demand limits the area from which the factory can secure its
supply. The length of time the cheeses are held in the curing-room and
the work necessary to care for them also limits the area which the
factory can serve, because a very large amount of milk cannot be handled
when the cheese must be given considerable attention in the
curing-rooms. Swiss, Limburger and Brick cheese factories usually do not
require a large supply of milk; therefore the factories may be built
close together. The size of the Cheddar cheese factories varies but it
is generally considered unprofitable to make Cheddar cheese unless there
are 5000 pounds of milk available daily. Conditions have changed so that
at present different kinds of cheese are made from the surplus milk in
market milk plants. In such cases a uniform supply is not absolutely
necessary. The climate must also be suitable for the industry.

+283. Locating the site.+--In a farming community, several factory sites
are usually available. It is best to consider carefully the desirable
features of each before trying to make a definite choice. Many of the
present cheese factories were located in hollows because it was easy to
secure a supply of water, but no thought or attention was given to the
disposal of the sewage. The following points should be considered in
choosing a site:

(1) _Drainage._--A factory should be so located that it has good
drainage. Ground that slopes away from the factory makes the disposal of
sewage easy. Sewage should not be allowed to run out on the ground and
left to decay, thus forming a breeding place for flies, but should run
into a cesspool or septic tank.[129] Even in a porous soil, a cesspool
frequently clogs and gives trouble. The septic tank seems to be the best
method to dispose of the sewage unless the factory is so located that
connection can be made with a city sewage system.

(2) _Water._--An abundant supply of pure water is essential to a
factory. This may come either from deep wells or springs. The value of a
never-failing water supply cannot be overestimated.

(3) _Exposure._--The factory should be so located that the receiving
room is away from the prevailing winds. This prevents dust being blown
into the factory. The curing-room should be on the side not exposed to
the sun as this will keep it cool. Fig. 59 shows a clean cheese factory
of the ordinary type. When it is desirable to cure the cheese in a
cellar, it is better to locate the factory on the side of a hill. Then
the receiving and manufacturing room may be on the ground level and the
curing-room, a cellar, back of the manufacturing room and yet all on
the same level. This saves carrying the cheese up and down stairs.

(4) _Accessibility to market_ should not be overlooked. Often the
quality of the cheese is injured by long hauls. An important item in
marketing both milk and cheese is the use of the automobile. By its use
the products are not so long in transit, and losses from exposure in
delivery are reduced. Both milk and cheese, when exposed to the heat of
the sun for any length of time, become warm. This gives undesirable
organisms chance to develop.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--A cheese factory of neat appearance.]

+284. The building.+--Details of construction or estimates of cost will
be omitted in the present discussion. A local contractor can do this
satisfactorily and also the cost of materials is constantly changing.
Only general considerations as they apply to the manufacture of the
product will be taken up.

The building may be constructed of wood, stone, various bricks or
concrete. The kind of material will depend on the relative cost of
materials in the local market and on the amount of money available for
building.

+285. Heating plant.+--Many of the older factories have no heating
plants and some are so poorly constructed that they cannot be warmed.
Means of heating should be provided, either by steam or a stove. The
loss due to freezing is an item which is entirely avoided in factories
properly heated.

+286. Curing-rooms.+--The size of the curing-rooms will depend on the
amount of cheese to be handled and its location on the variety of cheese
to be manufactured. In every case, some provision should be made to
control humidity and temperature. If the room becomes hot and dry,
evaporation from the cheese will be much more rapid. In a hot
curing-room, undesirable types of ferments are more likely to develop
and to injure the quality of the cheese.

+287. Light.+--The importance of light should be emphasized. It acts as
a stimulant to keep things clean. It also makes the factory more
cheerful. There should be numerous windows to give plenty of light. A
skylight may often serve both as a source of light and ventilation.

+288. Ventilation.+--Plenty of ventilation should be provided. This may
be accomplished by means of the windows or skylight. However, it is a
good precaution to have at least one ventilator to carry off the steam
and control the circulation of air. All openings should be carefully
screened to keep out flies.

+289. Boiler-room.+--The boiler-room should be easily accessible from
the manufacturing rooms. A gauge located in the latter should tell the
steam pressure. Windows or doors should be so located that the flues of
the boiler can be cleaned. The coal supply should be handy. Great care
should be exercised to keep the boiler-room clean for otherwise the dirt
will be tracked all over the factory.

+290. Whey tanks+ should be kept clean. Daily washing is absolutely
necessary to prevent offensive odors. Pasteurization of whey has been
found requisite to prevent the spread of disease if raw milk is
used.[130] This is required by law in some states. It is sometimes
accomplished by heat with steam coils; in other cases by running live
steam directly into the whey. Whey tanks may be made of wood or steel.
The acid of the whey seems to eat and decompose concrete.

+291. Store-room.+--There should be a separate room or a place in the
attic where the supplies can be kept. This saves much waste and keeps
the factory cleaner and more tidy.

+292. The floors.+--The floor is the most important part of the
building. It should be of non-absorbent material, which can be easily
cleaned, and it should not leak. Concrete makes the best floor of any
material used at present. It should slope very gently to the drain. The
corners between the floor and side walls should be rounding to make
cleaning easy. The drain should be provided with bell traps to prevent
the entrance of sewer gas into the factory. If the traps and floor about
them are slightly depressed, it will help to make the floor drain more
quickly. A catch-basin should be provided just outside the factory for
all solid material which might clog the sewer pipe. This should be
cleaned three or four times a year.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--A well arranged Cheddar cheese factory,
including the equipment for the manufacture of whey butter.]

+293. Arrangement of machinery and rooms.+--The rooms and machinery
should be arranged so that the work will follow the natural sequence of
the process with as little inconvenience as possible. Some of the points
to be observed in this connection are: vats should be near the
weigh-can; boiler-room near the work room; cheese presses near the vats;
cheese presses near the curing-rooms and the like.

Fig. 60 shows a well arranged Cheddar cheese factory. The necessary
machinery and rooms for the manufacture of whey butter are included. In
this plan, the attic contains the store-room and the whey tanks. The
whey is forced from the vats into the tanks with a steam jet and then
runs by gravity to the separator. Slides are provided in the walls of
the ice storage to regulate the flow of air into the curing-room and
butter refrigerator. In order to have a smaller boiler, a gasolene
engine is used to run the separator, churn and curd-mill. The plan can
be modified to use the upstairs for a curing-room so that the size of
the factory may be reduced. The whey butter could be shifted to a small
room where the curing-room now is and the boiler-room added as a
"lean-to" at one side of the building. This would materially reduce the
size of the main building.

Another plan (Fig. 61) shows the arrangement of a Cheddar cheese factory
without the whey butter apparatus. The location of the drain between the
vats might be criticized. In Fig. 62 is shown the arrangement of a
combined butter and cheese factory. Fig. 63 shows the possible
arrangement of a Limburger factory. The size of this factory could be
reduced by having the salting tables closer together.

In a Cheddar cheese factory, the curing-room may be over the
manufacturing room. This makes considerable work in carrying the cheese
up and down. A small elevator may be used for this purpose. The same
principle holds in cheese factories in which other varieties of cheese
are made; the floors should be on one level so far as possible. There
is danger of the overhead curing-room becoming too hot and causing the
cheese to leak fat. Shelves or tables should be provided on which to
put and keep the utensils. The utensils should never be placed on the
floor.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--Plan of Cheddar cheese factory without whey
butter equipment. 1, Boiler; 2, sink; 3, hot water barrel for scalding
utensils; 4, cheese vats; 5, 6, cheese presses; 7, weigh-can; 8, desk;
9, Babcock tester; 10, shelf; 11, paraffine tank; 12, cheese shelves.]

[Illustration: FIG. 62.--Combined Cheddar cheese and butter factory.

1, Boiler; 2, engine; 3, water pump; 4, work bench; 5, wash sink; 6,
press; 7, elevator; 8, cheese vats; 9, separator; 10, milk heater; 11,
milk receiving vat; 12, press; 13, shelf; 14, Babcock tester; 15,
weigh-can; 16, churn; 17, starter; 18, cream ripener and pasteurizer;
19, refrigerator; 20, milk sheet and sample jar; 21, milk pump.]

+294. Arrangements for cleanliness.+--A sink for washing the utensils
should be provided and boiling water to scald them after washing. After
being scalded, tin utensils dry quickly without rusting. The boiling
water may be obtained by placing a steam pipe in a barrel of water and
turning on the steam. The utensils can then be washed clean, dipped in
this barrel of boiling water and put in their place. Too much emphasis
cannot be laid on keeping the factory itself, the utensils and the
surroundings clean. This will prevent the development of mold. Cases are
known in which the cheese factory was allowed to become very dirty, so
that a red mold developed. This eventually got into the cheese and
caused red spots.[131] They are called rust spots. All doors and windows
should be screened to keep out flies.

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--A Limburger cheese factory.]

+295. Equipment and supplies list.+--The following utensils will be
needed in a Cheddar cheese factory to handle 10,000 pounds of milk
daily: 1 5-H. P. boiler; 1 60-gallon weigh-can; 1 conductor head and
trough; 1 platform scale; 1 Babcock tester, glassware and sample
bottles; 2 700-gallon cheese vats; 2 gang cheese presses; 1 curd-mill; 2
curd-knives; 30 cheese hoops; 1 whey strainer; 1 curd scoop; 1
long-handled dipper; 1 strainer dipper; 1 siphon; 1 cheese knife; 1
glass graduate; 1 cheese-trier; 1 speed knife; 1 paraffine tank; 1
Marschall rennet test; 1 lactometer; 1 milk can hoist; 1 acid test; 1
sink; 1 40-quart milk can; 3 pails; 3 shot-gun cans for starter; 3
thermometers; brushes and brooms; 1 Wisconsin curd test or fruit jars
for same; 1 set counter scales; 2 curd rakes.

If whey butter is made, the equipment should include: Tanks to hold the
whey; separator; cream ripening vat; churn; butter-worker; butter
refrigerator; large boiler and steam engine or gasolene engine.

The following supplies will be needed for the making of the cheese:
Bandages; boxes; scale boards; starched circles; rennet extract or
pepsin; cheese color; press cloths; paraffine; formaldehyde; alkali;
indicator; sulfuric acid.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--A sanitary dipper with a solid handle.]

When choosing the utensils, the ease of cleaning and sanitary
construction should not be overlooked. One of the most unsanitary
utensils in a factory is a dipper with a hollow handle. Fig 64 shows a
dipper with a solid handle which any tinsmith can make. The seams of all
utensils should be flushed full of solder, to make cleaning easy. When
ready to clean or wash any utensils which have come in contact with milk
or its products, the steps are as follows: rinse in cold water, wash in
warm water in which some washing-soda has been dissolved, rinse clean,
scald in boiling water. Never use a cloth to wash utensils; a brush is
more sanitary.

+296. Factory organization.+--There are two general classes of
organizations[132] to operate cheese factories, one the proprietary and
the other the coöperative. Unless the kind of organization is what the
dairy-men desire, dissatisfaction is sure to result.

(1) _Proprietary organization._--Under this form of organization, one
person owns and operates the factory. The dairy-men are paid a stated
price for milk, or the milk is made into cheese for a stated price a
pound. The proprietor receives all profits and assumes all losses.

So far as the dairy-man is concerned, the stock company is a proprietary
organization. The gains and losses are shared by each member according
to the amount of money invested.

(2) _Coöperative organization._--In a true coöperative cheese factory
each patron is an owner, as the name indicates. The object of this
organization is to reduce the cost of manufacture rather than pay large
dividends, so that the dairy-man with a large herd and small capital
invested in the factory obtains more returns than the one who owns
considerable capital and has a small herd. Many cheese factories are
coöperative in name only and proprietary in operation. The state of
Wisconsin has a law which tends to stop this defect and defines what
organizations may use the term or name, coöperative.

The constitution of a coöperative organization should state: 1, Name; 2,
object; 3, officers and duties of officers; 4, manager or other person
to run business; 5, capital stock; 6, meetings; 7, voting power; 8,
amendments.

Some of the most important statements which should appear in the
constitution are mentioned in the following sentences. A statement
should show what persons are eligible to membership in the organization.
It is a careless plan simply to say that the duties of the officers are
those usually defined in such an organization. This may lead to
confusion and neglect, or both. Direct statements should be made
explaining the exact duties of each officer. The limits of the authority
of the manager or person who runs the business should be explicitly
stated. The manager then knows just what his duties are and what matters
or parts of the business must be considered by other officers or
committees. The amount of capital stock and the number and value of each
share should be exactly stated. The constitution should state when and
where the regular meetings must be held and by whom and when special
meetings may be called. This gives every member ample notice of the
regular meetings. Some method or means should be provided to notify each
member of the special meetings.

The voting power should be definitely stated, whether it is limited to
shares of capital stock or by members or by number of cows owned by each
member. It is necessary to indicate just how amendments to the
constitution may be made. Each member should know before the final vote
just what changes are being proposed. Types of constitutions may be
found in the following references:


  ELLIOTT, W. J., Creameries and cheese factories;
  organization, building and equipment, Mont. Exp. Sta. Bul.
  53, 1904.

  FARRINGTON, E. H., and G. H. BENKENDORF, Organization and
  construction of creameries and cheese factories, Wis. Exp.
  Sta. Bul. 244, 1915.

  VAN SLYKE, L. L., and C. A. PUBLOW, The science and
  practice of cheese making, pages 447-453, 1909.

  Iowa Exp. Sta. Bul. 139, 1913. Creamery organization and
  construction.




CHAPTER XVIII

_HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHEESE INDUSTRY IN AMERICA_


Just when the first cheese was made is not known. By the time the first
immigrants came to America, cheese-making was rather generally known in
Europe, so that the early settlers brought with them and practiced
established methods. The countries of Europe developed different kinds
of cheese and have since become noted for such particular varieties, for
example: France, Camembert and Roquefort; Switzerland, Swiss cheese;
England, Stilton and Cheddar; Germany, Limburger; Holland, Edam and
Gouda; Italy, Parmesan and its allies, also Gorgonzola cheese. The
manufacture of these various cheeses has been attempted in this country.
Because of the difference in climatic conditions and in some cases the
use of milk of sheep or goats, it was and still is difficult to
manufacture some of the European cheeses in America. Since the climatic
conditions of this country and certain parts of England are somewhat
similar, the manufacture of the cheeses of England predominated, and
there was also more information on their manufacture. These are probably
the reasons why the United States and Canada have become famous for
Cheddar cheese.

The first cheeses of the Cheddar group were made on the farms. The work
was usually performed by women, and the process was very simple. The
methods were crude, and the cheeses were made in a more or less
haphazard way. The milk of the evening was placed in a cheese tub in the
dairy room and cooled to a temperature that would prevent souring. In
most cases the cream that had raised to the surface of the night's milk
was removed in the morning. This was considered an act of economy, for
it was thought that in the process of manufacture it would all pass off
in the whey and be lost. The morning's milk was then mixed with that of
the evening and warmed to the setting temperature by placing a portion
in a tin pail and suspending it in a kettle of hot water. When hot, it
was emptied into the tub of cold milk. By transferring back and forth,
the setting temperature was finally reached. Few of these settlers owned
thermometers. Consequently, cheese-makers were obliged to depend on the
sense of feeling to determine temperature.

One of the serious difficulties of the early manufacture was the
production of rennet of a uniform strength. After the addition of the
rennet and as soon as the coagulated milk became firm enough, it was
broken into as small pieces as could be conveniently made, a wooden
knife being used for the purpose. After standing ten minutes it was
stirred by hand, breaking the pieces finer, and the temperature was
gradually brought to 98° F., aiming as near blood heat as could be
judged by the sense of feeling. It was kept at this temperature until
the moisture was out of the curd and it would squeak between the teeth.
The whey was drawn off and the curd stirred until dry, salted and put to
press. All the curd of one day was made into a cheese. This resulted in
small uneven-sized cheese. Since such cheeses were made from the milk of
single dairies with all the surroundings clean, the flavor was usually
good but the texture was open and soft. The method of caring for the
cheese and marketing was entirely different from that practiced at the
present time. All the cheeses made during the entire season were held
until fall and marketed at one time. They were packed in casks four to
six in a package, one on top of the other. The earliest date when single
boxed cheeses were on the market was 1841.

Between 1820 and 1840, a small export trade in cheese was started. As
this demand for cheese increased, particularly in England, it became
necessary to change the methods employed in manufacture. The farm dairy
cheese was rather an open-textured sweet curd product. If not, it was
due more to accident than to any intention of the cheese-maker to
improve the quality. One of the early complaints from England was that
the cheeses were too small and uneven in size. The practice of making on
the farm continued until about 1851, when the factory system was
started, although home manufactures continued after that time. Following
are the reasons for the change from the farm to factory system: (1)
England demanded larger cheese; (2) the farm product was not uniform;
(3) the quality of the farm cheese did not suit the English trade; (4)
factories saved much labor on the farms; and (5) could secure higher
prices.

+297. The factory system.+--Where and by whom the first Cheddar cheese
factory in America was started is not definitely known. Jesse Williams
of Oneida County, New York, is supposed by many to have been the first
to build and operate under the factory system, in 1851. Cheese factories
were opened in Ohio and Wisconsin about 1860. In the period 1860 to
1870, a large number of cheese factories were built in the various
states, especially New York, Ohio and Wisconsin.

+298. Introduction of factory system in Canada.+--In 1863, Harvey
Farrington of Herkimer, New York, was so impressed with the opportunity
of developing the cheese factory system in Canada that he sold out his
business in New York and established the first Canadian cheese factory
in the town of Norwich, Ontario. It was accepted at once by Canadian
farmers, and factory cheese-making increased rapidly. In 1866, a small
quantity of cheese was exported and from that time the export trade of
Canada has been large and growing. Ontario and Quebec are now the
leading provinces in the production of cheese.

+299. Introduction of cheddaring.+--The factories at first used the same
process as the farms, namely the stirred-curd process. In 1867, Robert
McAdam introduced the English Cheddar system in a factory near Herkimer,
New York. This is the Cheddar system as known to-day. It produces the
closer bodied cheese demanded by the export trade. This introduction
made Herkimer County famous for its cheese.

+300. Introduction of Swiss and Limburger.+--In 1870, factories for
Limburger, Swiss and Brick cheese were started and have gradually
increased. In New York such plants are located around Boonville in
Oneida County, and Theresa, in Jefferson County. In Wisconsin, Swiss
cheese-making was begun by a colony of Swiss who came to New Glarus,
Green County. It is now made in Green, Lafayette, Iowa, Grant, Dane and
Rock counties. Limburger and Brick are manufactured in Dodge, Fond du
Lac, Winnebago, Marathon, La Crosse, Buffalo, Trempealeau, Clark,
Washington, Dunn, Barron and Lincoln counties. In the southeastern part
of Ohio Swiss cheese is produced. Ohio and Wisconsin have manufactured
more of these cheeses, especially Swiss, than any other states. This is
probably due to the fact that the conditions are more nearly like those
of Switzerland.

When the cities in New York began to grow, an increased demand for
market milk was felt. The result was that the dairy-men could not supply
both the cities and the cheese factories with milk. A large part of the
cheese was being exported and most of it had always been partly skimmed.
The amount of skimming, therefore, was largely increased. Then other
animal fats were substituted for the milk-fat. This product was known as
"filled" cheese. The delay in controlling the practice of making
skimmed-milk and filled cheese ruined the export trade. In Canada laws
prohibited the making of filled cheese and as a consequence Canadian
Cheddar cheese is still very popular in England. However, with the
control of skimmed-milk cheese-making and the elimination of filled
cheese, the volume continued to grow and to find outlet in local
consumption. New York probably exported more cheese than any other
state. Wisconsin shipped cheese into other regions, especially the
southern states in which no cheeses were made. Some Wisconsin cheeses
were shipped to the New York market from time to time, but in October,
1913, the first quotations[133] were made in New York City for Wisconsin
products.

+301. Number and distribution of cheese factories.+--The following list
and maps (Figs. 65, 66) compiled in 1914 by the United States Department
of Agriculture Dairy Division, show the number of cheese factories in
the different states and their location:

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--Map showing the distribution of cheese
factories in the principal cheese-producing states.]

  Arizona         3
  California     93
  Colorado        8
  Connecticut     2
  Delaware        1
  Illinois       50
  Indiana        13
  Iowa           25
  Kansas          1
  Maine           5
  Michigan      196
  Minnesota      74
  Missouri        4
  Montana         1
  Nebraska        1
  New Hampshire   2
  New York      995
  North Dakota    3
  Ohio          111
  Oklahoma        1
  Oregon         42
  Pennsylvania  106
  South Dakota    1
  Utah            8
  Vermont        35
  Virginia        3
  Washington     15
  West Virginia   1
  Wisconsin    1720
               ----
               3520

+302. Total production of cheese in the United States.+--The following
figures (Table XX) compiled by the United States Census show the total
production of cheese and the amount made on farms and in factories in
the United States by ten-year periods:


  TABLE XX

  SHOWING THE TOTAL PRODUCTION OF CHEESE AND PART
    MADE ON FARMS AND IN FACTORIES IN THE UNITED
    STATES BY TEN-YEAR PERIODS

  1849    Total          105,535,893 pounds

  1859    Total          103,663,927 pounds

  1869    Total          162,927,382 pounds

  1879    Total          243,157,850 pounds

  1889    On farms        18,726,818 pounds
          In factories   238,035,065 pounds
          Total          256,761,883 pounds

  1899    On farms        16,372,330 pounds
          In factories   281,972,324 pounds
          Total          298,344,654 pounds

  1909    On farms         9,405,864 pounds
          In factories   311,126,317 pounds
          Total          320,532,181 pounds

Comparing the figures of 1899 with those of 1909, it is seen that the
total production of cheese in the United States increased 22,187,539
pounds, or an increase of 7.4 per cent in 1909 over 1899. During the
same years the amount made on the farms decreased 6,966,454 pounds, or a
decrease of 42.6 per cent, while the amount made in factories increased
29,153,933 pounds or 10.3 per cent.

+303. Rank of the leading cheese-producing states.+--The rank of the
leading cheese states according to the number of factories in 1914 was:
Wisconsin 1720, New York 995, Michigan 196, Ohio 111, Pennsylvania 106.

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--Showing the cheese factories in the Pacific
coast states.]

The table on the opposite page (Table XXI) shows the amount of cheese
produced by the five states with the largest number of factories. This
table indicates that New York led in the production of cheese until some
time between 1899 and 1909. This is probably because, New York having so
many cities, the demand for market milk is so large that it is sold as
such instead of being manufactured into cheese. There is about the same
number of milch cows in New York and Wisconsin. However, Wisconsin is
credited with more cheese in 1909 than New York ever produced and this
output probably will increase, as there are considerable areas of
undeveloped agricultural land in Wisconsin. It is also interesting to
note that Ohio is falling off in cheese production. This may be due to
the increased demand for market milk. On the other hand, production has
increased in Pennsylvania.

  TABLE XXI

  SHOWING THE AMOUNT OF CHEESE MADE IN FIVE LEADING STATES
  BY TEN-YEAR PERIODS

  ----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  STATE     |YEAR 1859 |YEAR 1869  |YEAR 1879  |YEAR 1889  |
  ----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
            |Amount in | Amount in |Amount in  |Amount in  |
            |  pounds  |  pounds   |  pounds   |  pounds   |
            |          |           |           |           |
            |          |           |           |           |
            |          |           |           |           |
  Wisconsin | 1,104,300|  3,288,581| 19,535,324| 54,614,861|
            |          |           |           |           |
  New York  |48,548,289|100,776,012|129,163,714|124,086,524|
            |          |           |           |           |
  Michigan  | 1,641,897|  2,321,801|  3,953,585|  5,370,460|
            |          |           |           |           |
  Ohio      |21,618,893| 24,153,876| 32,531,683| 22,254,054|
            |          |           |           |           |
  Penn      | 2,508,556|  2,792,676|  8,966,737|  5,457,897|
  ----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

  ----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  STATE     |YEAR 1899  |YEAR 1909  |YEAR 1914  |
  ----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
            |Amount in  |Amount in  |Amount in  |
            |  pounds   |  pounds   |pounds from|
            |           |           |factories  |
            |           |           |only       |
            |           |           |           |
  Wisconsin | 79,384,298|148,906,910|205,920,915|
            |           |           |           |
  New York  |130,010,584|105,584,947| 97,614,024|
            |           |           |           |
  Michigan  | 10,753,758| 13,673,336| 13,267,145|
            |           |           |           |
  Ohio      | 19,363,528| 12,473,834|  8,717,996|
            |           |           |           |
  Penn      | 11,124,610| 12,676,713| 14,808,573|
  ----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

+304. Exportation and importation of cheese by the United States.+--The
accompanying table shows the exports and imports of cheese from 1851 to
1916 and their values, in so far as the figures are available.

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Showing relationship of total production,
exports and imports of cheese.]

One noteworthy item in Table XXII is that the exports have gradually
decreased and imports increased. This is probably because immigrants
have demanded the cheeses of their native country which were not made in
America. The exports for the years 1915 and 1916 are interesting as they
show the effect of the war on the cheese industry, the imports being
gradually decreased and the exports greatly increased.


  TABLE XXII

  SHOWING THE IMPORTS AND EXPORTS OF CHEESE BY THE
  UNITED STATES FROM 1851-1916

  ------+----------------------+--------------------------
   YEAR |        IMPORTS       |          EXPORTS
  ------+-----------+----------+-------------+------------
        |  Amount   |          |   Amount    |
        |    in     | Value in |     in      | Value in
        |  pounds   | dollars  |   pounds    | dollars
        |           |          |             |
   1851 |   603,398 |  ----    |  10,361,189 |  ----
   1852 |   514,337 |  ----    |   6,650,420 |  ----
   1853 |   874,949 |  ----    |   3,763,932 |  ----
   1854 |   969,417 |  ----    |   7,003,974 |  ----
   1855 | 1,526,942 |  ----    |   4,846,568 |  ----
   1856 | 1,384,272 |  ----    |   8,737,029 |  ----
   1857 | 1,400,252 |  ----    |   6,453,072 |  ----
   1858 | 1,589,066 |  ----    |   8,098,527 |  ----
   1859 | 1,409,420 |  ----    |   7,103,323 |  ----
   1860 | 1,401,161 |  ----    |  15,515,799 |  ----
   1861 | 1,090,835 |  ----    |  32,361,428 |  ----
   1862 |   594,822 |  ----    |  34,052,678 |  ----
   1863 |   545,966 |  ----    |  42,045,054 |  ----
   1864 |   836,127 |  ----    |  47,751,329 |  ----
   1865 |   985,362 |  ----    |  53,154,318 |  ----
   1866 |   ----    |  ----    |  36,411,985 |  ----
   1867 | 1,738,657 |  ----    |  52,352,127 |  ----
   1868 | 2,997,994 |  ----    |  51,097,203 |  ----
   1869 |    ----   |  ----    |  39,960,367 |  ----
   1870 |    ----   |  ----    |  57,296,327 |  ----
   1871 |    ----   |  ----    |  63,698,867 |  ----
   1872 |    ----   |  ----    |  66,204,025 |  ----
   1873 |    ----   |  ----    |  80,366,540 |  ----
   1874 |    ----   |  ----    |  90,611,077 |  ----
   1875 |    ----   |  ----    | 101,010,853 |  ----
   1876 |    ----   |  ----    |  97,676,264 |  ----
   1877 |    ----   |  ----    | 107,364,666 |  ----
   1878 |    ----   |  ----    | 123,783,736 |  ----
   1879 |    ----   |  ----    | 141,654,474 |  ----
   1880 |    ----   |  ----    | 127,553,907 |  ----
   1881 |    ----   |  ----    | 147,995,614 |  ----
   1882 |    ----   |  ----    | 127,989,782 |  ----
   1883 |    ----   |  ----    |  99,220,467 |  ----
   1884 | 6,243,014 |  ----    | 112,869,575 |  ----
   1885 | 6,247,560 |  ----    | 111,992,990 |  ----
   1886 | 6,309,124 |  ----    |  91,877,235 |
   1887 | 6,592,192 |  ----    |  81,255,994 |
   1888 | 8,750,185 |  ----    |  88,008,458 |
   1889 | 8,207,026 |  ----    |  84,999,828 |
   1890 | 9,263,573 |  ----    |  95,376,053 |
   1891 | 8,863,640 |  ----    |  82,133,876 |
   1892 | 8,305,288 |  ----    |  82,100,221 |
   1893 |10,195,924 |  ----    |  81,350,923 |
   1894 | 8,742,851 |  ----    |  73,852,134 |
   1895 |10,276,293 |  ----    |  60,448,421 |
   1896 |10,728,397 |  ----    |  36,777,291 |
   1897 |12,319,122 |  ----    |  50,944,617 |
   1898 |10,012,188 |  ----    |  53,167,280 |
   1899 |11,826,175 |  ----    |  38,198,753 |
   1900 |13,455,990 |  ----    |  48,419,353 |
   1901 |15,329,099 |  ----    |  39,813,517 |
   1902 |17,067,714 |$2,551,366|  27,203,184 |$2,745,597
   1903 |20,671,384 | 3,183,224|  18,987,178 | 2,250,229
   1904 |22,707,103 | 3,284,811|  23,335,172 | 2,452,239
   1905 |23,095,705 | 3,379,600|  10,134,424 | 1,084,044
   1906 |27,286,866 | 4,303,830|  16,562,451 | 1,940,620
   1907 |33,848,766 | 5,704,012|  17,285,230 | 2,012,626
   1908 |32,530,830 | 5,586,706|   8,439,031 | 1,092,053
   1909 |35,548,143 | 5,866,154|   6,822,842 |   857,091
   1910 |40,817,524 | 7,053,570|   2,846,709 |   441,017
   1911 |45,568,797 | 7,920,244|  10,366,605 | 1,288,279
   1912 |46,542,007 | 8,807,249|   6,337,559 |   898,035
   1913 |49,387,944 | 9,185,184|   2,599,058 |   441,186
   1914 |63,784,313 |11,010,693|   2,427,577 |   414,124
   1915 |50,138,520 | 9,370,048|  55,362,917 | 8,463,174
   1916 |30,087,999 | 7,058,420|  44,394,301 | 7,430,089
  ------+-----------+----------+-------------+------------

The graph (Fig. 67) represents the total production and the exports and
imports of cheese into the United States.

+305. Average yearly price of cheese.+--The following table shows the
average yearly price of Cheddar cheese in the United States:

  TABLE XXIII

  SHOWING THE AVERAGE YEARLY PRICE OF CHEESE, 1892-1916

                 YEAR                 CENTS
                 1892                  9.4
                 1893                  9.4
                 1894                  9.7
                 1895                  9.1
                 1896                  8.4
                 1897                  9.1
                 1898                  8.6
                 1899                  8.6
                 1900                 10.2
                 1901                  9.9
                 1902                 10.1
                 1903                 11.9
                 1904                 10.5
                 1905                 10.7
                 1906                 11.7
                 1907                 11.6
                 1908                 12.9
                 1909                 12.6
                 1910                 15.5
                 1911                 12.4
                 1912                 14.2
                 1913                 17.0
                 1914                 17.1
                 1915                 15.3
                 1916                 16.7

The graph (Fig. 68) shows that the average yearly price has increased
from 9.4 cents a pound to 16.7 cents.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--Average yearly price of cheese.]

+306. Canadian cheese statistics.+--The following statistics show the
development of the industry in Canada. The figures in Table XXIV show
the number of cheese factories, the amount of milk received and the
total production in Canada.

Table XXIV indicates that the number of cheese factories has decreased
but that the production has increased. Because of the scarcity of
figures, conclusions would not be accurate.

The figures in Table XXV of the exports and imports show that the
exports gradually decreased and the imports increased. If the production
has increased, as shown in Table XXIV, more cheese must be consumed by
the Canadians. The effect of the war is probably seen in the year 1916,
when the imports are decreased and the exports increased.


  TABLE XXIV

  SHOWING THE NUMBER OF CHEESE FACTORIES, AMOUNT OF
  MILK RECEIVED AND THE FACTORY PRODUCTION OF
  CHEESE

  -------+------------+---------------+---------------
         | NUMBER OF  |   POUNDS OF   |  FACTORY
   YEAR  | CHEESE     |   MILK        | PRODUCTION
         | FACTORIES  |   DELIVERED   | OF CHEESE
  -------+------------+---------------+---------------
   1900  |   ----     |    ----       | 220,833,269
         |            |               |
   1907  |   ----     |    ----       | 204,788,583
         |            |               |
   1910  |   2291     |    ----       | 199,904,205
         |            |               |
   1915  |   1871     | 1,501,946,221 | 183,887,837
         |            |               |
   1916  |   1813     | 1,503,997,215 | 192,968,597
  -------+------------+---------------+---------------


  TABLE XXV

  SHOWING THE AMOUNT AND VALUE OF CANADIAN EXPORTS AND
  IMPORTS OF CHEESE

  ------+--------------------------+----------------------
   Year |          Exports         |        Imports
  ------+-------------+------------+-----------+----------
        | Amount in   | Value in   | Amount in | Value in
        |  pounds     | dollars    |  pounds   | dollars
  ------+-------------+------------+-----------+----------
   1880 |  40,368,000 | $3,893,000 |           |
        |             |            |           |
   1890 |  94,260,000 |  9,372,212 |           |
        |             |            |           |
   1900 | 185,984,000 | 19,856,324 |           |
        |             |            |           |
   1910 | 180,859,000 | 21,607,692 |   683,778 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1911 | 181,895,000 | 20,739,507 |   866,653 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1912 | 163,450,000 | 20,888,818 |   919,189 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1913 | 155,216,000 | 20,697,000 | 1,495,758 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1914 | 144,478,000 | 18,866,000 | 1,512,108 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1915 | 137,601,000 | 19,213,000 | 1,162,456 |  ----
        |             |            |           |
   1916 | 168,961,000 |   ----     |   971,821 |  ----
  ------+-------------+------------+-----------+----------

If the total population of the United States is figured at 100 million
and the difference between the exports and imports found and added to
the total production, it shows that the average person must consume
about three and one-half pounds of cheese in a year.

In the past few years there has been considerable demand for more of the
foreign cheeses, such as Camembert and Roquefort.

+307. Introduction of cheese-making into new regions.+--The manufacture
of Cheddar cheese is being encouraged in new regions, in the Alleghany
Mountains, in Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee and in
the western states. There has also sprung up a considerable demand for
the lactic acid group of cheeses, especially Neufchâtel and Cottage, so
that while the cheese industry may decline in certain sections, the
total production will probably increase. In the proper locations or
sections, the cheese industry has a very bright future. The development
of the skimmed-milk cheeses will undoubtedly be given considerable
attention in the next few years.


REFERENCES

  N. Y. Dept. Agr. Bul. 54, The Dairy Industry in New York State.

  N. Y. Produce Rev. and American Creamery.
    Vol. 34, No. 3, page 108.
    Vol. 37, No. 16, page 684.
    Vol. 37, No. 16, page 666.
    Vol. 37, No. 9, page 411.
    Vol. 33, No. 11, page 482.
    Vol. 36, No. 23, page 1078.

  Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1897, pages 113-149.

  U. S. Census.

  U. S. Dept. Agr. Year Books.

  Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce.

  Statistical abstract of the U. S.

  Canadian Dept. Agr. 1915, Report of the dairy and cold storage
    commissioner.

  Dominion of Canada, Census and Statistics office, Rept. 1915.




CHAPTER XIX

_TESTING_


In connection with marketing, a certain amount of testing of the
products should be practiced, to determine exactly the results and
grades of products. This includes the testing of the whole milk, whey
and cheese for fat, the milk for casein, and the cheese for moisture. In
factories in which the milk is bought on the fat basis, it is necessary
to test each patron's milk for fat. If there is a cheese-moisture law in
the state, it is necessary to test for moisture. The whey should be
tested to learn the loss of fat in the manufacturing process and to
ascertain whether the losses have been reduced to the minimum.

+308. The fat test.+--The test commonly used to determine the fat in
milk is known as the Babcock. The principle of this test is as follows:
Fat exists in the form of very small globules. Because the fat globules
are lighter than the other milk constituents, under the influence of the
force of gravity most of them rise to the surface. There, mixed with the
other milk substances, these globules form a layer of cream. Babcock
found that by adding to the milk sulfuric acid of proper strength and
temperature, the casein, the milk-sugar and the albumin are decomposed
and the sticky quality of the milk is destroyed. The acid does not
decompose the fat but leaves it free to come to the surface of the
mixture. Under centrifugal force, this fat is quickly brought to the
surface. By using a known quantity of milk and having a scale graduated
in percentage of the amount of milk, the percentage of fat can be
determined. Fig. 69 shows the necessary equipment.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Apparatus necessary to test milk and whey for
fat and total solids.]

There are three kinds of bottles employed in making the test, one with a
very large neck which is used when testing materials high in fat-content
such as cream, butter and cheese. This is generally called a cream-test
bottle. It is graduated from 0 to 50 per cent. When testing materials
with a small amount of fat such as whey, skim-milk and buttermilk, a
test bottle with two necks is used, one with a small bore for the fat
and the other neck with a larger bore to add the milk, acid, water. It
is graduated from 0 to 0.5 of 1 per cent. There is a third bottle
between the other two to test whole milk. This is known as a whole-milk
bottle. It is graduated from 0 to 8 per cent. All of the glassware
should comply with the laws.

+309. Sampling the milk.+--One of the most important parts of testing is
to obtain a fair sample of the milk. The milk to be tested may be in a
vat or in a farmer's can or a composite sample jar. If the milk is
bought on the fat basis, that of each patron is not tested daily, but a
small quantity, about half an ounce, is taken each day and placed in a
jar; this is known as a composite sample. It is the usual practice to
number the patrons and have a sample bottle for each patron with his
number on it. Some substance must be added to preserve the milk and to
keep it from souring or coagulating. It is difficult to secure a fair
sample of sour milk. A wide-mouthed jar is preferred for keeping milk
samples. This must be kept closed to prevent evaporation. Each day when
milk is added to the composite sample, the bottles should be shaken to
prevent the cream drying. Composite samples are tested at least twice a
month. The milk may be mixed to obtain a fair sample, by stirring in the
vat or by pouring from one bottle to another. Vigorous shaking should be
avoided as this is likely to cause churning. One should see that all the
cream is removed from the sides of the sample bottle and that it is
evenly distributed through the milk. The sample of milk is now measured
out with the pipette. This is graduated to deliver 18 grams of milk, and
holds 17.6 c.c. Hold the pipette between the thumb and second finger of
the right hand with the tip below the surface of the milk, draw the milk
by suction with the lips until it is filled well above the graduation.
Quickly place the forefinger over the opening and at right angles to the
pipette. By gently and carefully raising the forefinger, allow the milk
to run down until the surface is exactly level with the graduation. To
obtain an accurate reading, the pipette should be on a level with the
eye. Then with the left hand, hold the milk test bottle in a slanting
position and place the tip of the pipette into it about one-third of an
inch and at a slight angle. Now let the milk slowly flow down the side
of the neck of the bottle, making certain that none is blown out by the
escaping air. When all has run out of the pipette, blow out the drop
which remains in the tip. Then measure out another sample in the same
way, as the test should be made in duplicate.

+310. Adding the acid.+--The sulfuric acid should have a specific
gravity between 1.82 and 1.83. It should be kept in glass-stoppered
bottles or carboys to prevent the absorption of moisture from the air,
which will reduce its strength. Acid that is too strong might burn the
fat. The acid is a strong poison and will burn if it comes in contact
with the flesh or the clothing. In such case, it should be removed by
washing with plenty of water. An alkaline substance such as ammonia or
bicarbonate of soda should be applied to remove any acid not washed
away.

The acid measure holds 17.5 c.c. and it should be filled to the
graduation. Then this acid should be added to the test bottle. The
bottle should be held at an angle and slowly rotated so that the acid
will rinse down any milk remaining in the neck of the bottle.
Immediately mix the acid and milk by whirling the body of the bottle in
a circle five or six inches in diameter. The mixture should not be
allowed to go into the neck of the bottle while mixing. Continue shaking
for about a minute after all the curd has disappeared. One should avoid
pointing the neck of the bottle toward any person in the mixing
operation. The acid unites with all the milk substances except the fat
and generates much heat.

+311. Centrifuging.+--There are two machines in common use for
centrifuging, one that runs by mechanical power and the other smaller
and runs by hand. If the machine and atmosphere are very cold, the
apparatus can be warmed by placing hot water in it. This is not
necessary in a steam machine. In a factory where there are a number of
samples to test, a power machine is usually employed. In this machine
there are pockets or cups in which to set the test bottles. The machine
or disk must be balanced by placing bottles in opposite pockets. These
pockets are hinged so that when standing still the bottle is in an
upright position and when the centrifuge is running, it is in a
horizontal position. The machine should then be covered and started
running. It should be run at the speed indicated. After five minutes,
stop the machine and fill the bottles with boiling water up to the neck.
This can be done without taking the bottles out of the machine. A
pipette or slender-spouted vessel may be used to add the water. Whirl
the bottles two minutes, then add more boiling water to bring the fat
column into the graduated part of the neck of the bottle. Then whirl one
minute. The test should be read at once or the bottles kept at a
temperature of 130° to 140° F. until ready to read.

+312. Reading the test.+--To read the test, subtract the reading at the
bottom of the fat column from that at the highest point. The curved
meniscus which always forms at the top of the fat column should be
included in the reading. Duplicate samples should not vary more than O.2
of 1 per cent. Standard Babcock test bottles and pipettes should always
be used. In some states the agricultural experiment stations examine all
glassware and mark it to make certain that it conforms to the
requirements of the state law. In New York, glassware found to be
correct is branded "S. B.," which means State Brand. In some states a
person must have a license to test milk or cream, when it is paid for on
the fat test. Such a person must pass an examination to show that he
understands the test before a license, will be granted. The license may
be revoked if the work is not honestly performed.

+313. Testing whey for fat.+--Because of the small amount of fat in
whey, it is difficult to obtain a representative sample. The best way,
if the entire amount cannot be placed in a vat and stirred, is to catch
a little of the whey at intervals as it is being drawn from the vat. The
sample to be tested is measured with the pipette the same as the milk
and placed in the skimmed-milk test bottle. The same acid is used to
test whey as to test milk but because there are not so many solids to
destroy, not so much is used. If as much acid is used with whey as with
milk, it will burn the fat and so interfere with the reading of the
test. Just enough acid is added to destroy the milk substances except
the fat, or enough to turn the contents of the test bottle dark brown.
This usually requires filling the acid measure one-quarter of an inch
under the graduation. The remainder of the test is the same as for whole
milk.

+314. Testing cheese for fat.+--The sample of cheese to test for fat is
obtained by removing the sample with a cheese-trier. This sample is
called a "plug." Different plugs from the same cheese will test various
percentages of fat so that it is difficult to secure a representative
sample. The usual practice is to take three plugs, one near the center,
another near the outside and the third between the first two. The plugs
should be put into glass-stoppered bottles to prevent the evaporation of
moisture. These plugs are then chopped up very fine. It is of course
impossible to measure the cheese as with milk and whey, but it is
weighed (Fig. 70). If the cheese is soft it can be stirred with a
spatula until well mixed. A soft cheese usually sticks to the neck of
the test bottle. After being weighed, it can be dissolved in a little
sodium hydroxide and poured into the bottle. Different amounts may be
used, commonly 4½ or 6 grams, but 6 grams is to be preferred. This is
placed in the Babcock cream bottle since there will usually be more fat
than can be read in a milk bottle. After the material has been placed in
the test bottle, about two-thirds of an acid-measure of warm water is
added to assist in dissolving the cheese.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Apparatus necessary to test cheese for fat.]

The acid is added the same as with the milk. If all the cheese particles
are not destroyed, and therefore do not disappear, a little more acid
will complete the solution. Centrifuging is performed as with the milk.

+315. Reading the test.+--In a cream-test bottle the neck is so much
wider that there is a much larger meniscus. In order to obtain an
accurate result, the meniscus should be removed. This is done by
carefully adding a substance called glymol, which is a mineral oil
colored red. Usually about one-quarter of an inch of glymol is added to
the fat column. This should not mix with the fat. The bottles should be
placed in a hot water bath 135° to 140° F. for four minutes before
reading. The temperature at reading should be 135° to 140° F. The
reading is then taken from the bottom of the fat column to the line
between this and the glymol. The bottle is graduated for 18 grams of
material, but as only a part of 18 grams of cheese was used for the
test, the reading should be multiplied by the part of 18 grams used. For
example, suppose 6 grams of cheese were used and the test read 12 per
cent fat. Since 6 is one third of 18, the actual percentage of fat is 3
times 12, or 36 per cent.

+316. The Hart[134] casein test+ was devised to determine the percentage
of casein in milk. A special test bottle and centrifuge are necessary.
The method of making the test is as follows: Place 2 c.c. of chloroform
in the casein test tube, add 20 c.c. of a 0.25 of 1 per cent solution of
acetic acid at a temperature of 65° to 75° F. This solution of acetic
acid is made by diluting 10 c.c. of glacial acetic acid with 100 c.c. of
water, then dilute 25 c.c. of this solution to 1000 c.c. with water; 5
c.c. of milk at a temperature of 65° to 75° F. is then run into the
bottle. The bottle is then covered with the thumb and inverted and the
mixture shaken vigorously for exactly twenty seconds. It is then
centrifuged within twenty minutes at a speed of 2000 revolutions a
minute. The bottle should stand ten minutes before reading the
percentage of casein. There are other tests for casein but they are very
complicated.

+317. Solids in the milk.+--Because not only the fat but all the solids
are utilized in cheese-making, it is important to know the amount of the
solids in the milk. This is ascertained by determining the specific
gravity of the milk and knowing the fat-content; the solids not fat can
then be calculated.

+318. The lactometer.+--The specific gravity of liquids is measured by
an instrument called a hydrometer. Its use is based on the fact that
when a solid body floats in a liquid, it displaces a volume of liquid
equal in weight to its own. Hydrometers are in many cases so made that
the specific gravity can be read at the point where the scale is even
with the upper surface of the liquid. A hydrometer that is especially
adapted to milk is called a lactometer. There are two lactometers in
common use, the Quevenne and the Board of Health.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--A Quevenne lactometer.]

_The Quevenne lactometer._--This is a long slender hollow piece of glass
weighted at the bottom to make it float in the milk in an upright
position (Fig. 71). The upper end is slender and contains the scale.
This scale is graduated from 15 at the top to 40 at the bottom. Each
reading on the scale corresponds to the point marked specific gravity on
a hydrometer, except that the figures are not complete. For example, 15
on the Quevenne scale means a specific gravity of 1.015; a reading of
30 on the Quevenne scale means a specific gravity of 1.030, and so on.
The Quevenne lactometer is graduated to give correct results at a
temperature of 60° F. The milk should be at this temperature. If the
temperature is below or above this, a correction must be made to the
reading. The temperature should not be more than 10 degrees above or
below 60° F. The correction for each degree in variation of temperature
can be made by adding 0.1 or subtracting 0.1 from the lactometer
reading, as the case may be. If the temperature is above 60° F., the
correction is added to the lactometer and if it is below 60° F., the
correction is subtracted from the lactometer reading. The reading should
be taken when the lactometer is floating free in the milk. The scale is
read exactly at the surface of the milk. The better lactometers have a
thermometer with the scale just above or opposite the lactometer scale.

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--A Board of Health lactometer.]

_The Board of Health lactometer._--This is very similar to the Quevenne
lactometer except that the scale is graduated from 0 to 120 (Fig. 72).
The point on the scale of the lactometer that floats at the surface in
water is represented by 0, and 100 represents the specific gravity of
1.029. On the Board of Health lactometer, the 100 degrees or divisions
from 0 to 100 equal 29 divisions on the Quevenne. Therefore, one
division on the Board of Health equals 0.29 of a division on the
Quevenne. To convert Board of Health reading to Quevenne, multiply by
0.29 and to convert Quevenne to Board of Health, divide by 0.29. The
correction for temperatures above or below 60° F. is made the same as
with the Quevenne, except 0.3 is added or subtracted from the reading
instead of 0.1 as with the Quevenne.

+319. Calculating the solids not fat in the milk.+--When the lactometer
reading and fat-content of the milk are known, there are several
formulas for calculating the solids not fat. In the following formulas,
L equals Quevenne lactometer reading at 60° F., and F equals the
percentage of fat in the milk:

  L + 0.7 F
  --------- = S.N.F
     3.8

  L + F
  ----- = S.N.F.
    4

  L
  - + 0.2 F + 0.14 = S.N.F.
  4

+320. Testing cheese for moisture.+[135]--There are two methods of
testing cheese for moisture. The following is a simple test devised by
H. C. Troy:

The ordinary butter moisture test, in which a metal cup is heated over a
flame, cannot be used for determining the percentage of water in cheese
because the high temperature developed in operating that test drives
from he cheese other substances with the water. Also, particles are lost
by spattering when the cheese is heated with any degree of rapidity in
the shallow butter-moisture cups. To overcome these difficulties, the
new method here described has been developed for the purpose of
determining the percentage of moisture in cheese. The apparatus consists
of:

  1 double-walled copper drying cup
  1 centigrade thermometer registering to 200°
  1 alcohol lamp
  1 tripod
  1 special flask
  1 scales sensitive to 0.01 gram
  1 set of weights, 0.01 to 100 grams

The body of the copper drying cup may be made in two parts. One of the
parts is a jacket that forms the outer wall of the apparatus. It has a
flat bottom 4½ inches in diameter, and the perpendicular wall is
4½ inches in height. The inner part of the cup must have a flat
bottom 2¾ inches in diameter and a side wall 3¾ inches high. A
flange attached to the upper rim of the inner part extends out at right
angles to the cup wall and forms a cover for the space between the walls
when the two parts are put together. The flange is bent down around its
outer edge to make it fit snugly over the upper rim of the outer jacket.
It thus holds the inner cup securely in place, leaving a space about ¾
inch wide for oil between the walls and bottoms, and permits the
apparatus to be taken apart readily. A circular opening about ½ inch
in diameter is made through the flange to permit the insertion of a
thermometer for taking the temperature of the oil or the melted fat
which is used in the space between the walls. Lard or tallow serves best
for use in this space; a readily inflammable oil should not be employed.
The thermometer may be permanently held in place by passing it snugly
through a hole bored in a cork, the cork being then fitted into the
hole through the flange. A flat metal cover is placed on the cup when
making a test. This cover has a hole through the center just large
enough to permit the neck of the drying flask to extend up through it.
The cover assists in keeping the body of the flask at a constant
temperature by preventing the entrance of cold air currents. The
thermometer should register changes in temperature between zero and 200°
C. The alcohol lamp should yield a flame about ¼ inch in diameter and
¾ inch high. The tripod should be about 6 inches high and of proper
diameter at the top to support the oil bath.

An ordinary flat-bottom glass Erlenmeyer flask, of such a diameter as to
fit neatly into the oil-bath cup, may be used to hold the cheese during
the drying operation; but a special glass flask serves better. It is
made with a flat bottom 2½ inches in diameter, which will fit into
the cup of the drying apparatus. The side walls of this flask should be
perpendicular for about 1 inch, when they should begin to slope in
toward the base of the neck, which should be located about 2 inches
above the bottom. The neck of the flask should be 1 inch in diameter,
with perpendicular walls, and its length should give the flask a total
height of 4¾ inches. When the apparatus (Fig. 73) is put together for
the first time, the melted fat or oil may be placed in the outer jacket
and the inner cup may then be fitted into position, or the parts may be
put together first and the oil then poured into the space between the
cup walls through the opening where the thermometer is to be placed. The
oil should fill the space to within an inch of the top. The cork
through which the thermometer has been passed is then fitted into the
opening. The thermometer bulb should be placed in the oil about half an
inch above the bottom of the outer jacket. The apparatus is then placed
on the tripod over the alcohol lamp. A flame ½ inch in diameter and
¾ inch high will give sufficient heat to hold the bath at the proper
temperature. The temperature may be regulated by raising or lowering the
lamp or by changing the size of the flame by adjusting the wick.
Hundreds of tests may be run without taking the apparatus apart or
changing the oil. The copper drying cup can be made by any tinsmith. The
other parts may be ordered through any dairy or chemical supply company.


[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Apparatus necessary to test cheese for
moisture.]

In operating the test, the alcohol lamp is first lighted, so that the
oil bath may be warming while the test sample is under preparation. A
representative sample of the cheese, which may be taken with a
cheese-trier and held in a glass-stoppered sample jar, is then cut into
particles about the size of kernels of wheat without removing it from
the jar. This may be accomplished with an ordinary table knife that has
had the end squared and sharpened. The clean dry flask is then
accurately balanced on the scales and a 5-gram weight is placed in the
opposite scale pan. Particles of cheese from the prepared sample are put
into the flask until the scales comes to an exact balance. Great care
should be taken to avoid loss of moisture from the cheese in the
preparation of the sample.

With the thermometer in the oil bath registering between 140° and 145°
C. (or between 284° and 293° F.), the flask is placed in the cup of the
oil bath and the flat disk-shaped cover is adjusted over the apparatus.
The flask should remain in the bath for fifty minutes, the temperature
being kept between 140° and 145° C. all the time. The flask is then
removed, covered and allowed to cool to room temperature in a dry place.
It is then weighed, and the quotient obtained by dividing the loss in
weight by the original weight, multiplied by 100, gives the percentage
of water in the cheese. The following shows the method of computation:

Problem: Five grams of cheese was heated until the water contained in it
was evaporated. The remaining substance weighed 3.15 grams. What
percentage of water did the cheese contain?

  Answer: 5.00 - 3.15 = 1.85
          1.85 ÷ 5    = 0.37
          0.37 × 100  = 37 (percentage of water in cheese)

A butter-moisture scales with an extra 5-gram weight may be used for
weighing out the 5 grams of cheese. If the scales indicates the amount
of moisture in 10 grams of butter by percentage graduations on its beam
or by percentage weights, then it will be necessary to multiply by 2 the
percentage indicated by such scales or percentage weights when only 5
grams of cheese is used.

The moisture may be determined by weighing out a small sample of cheese
and drying it in an oven and calling the loss moisture. Many such ovens
have been devised.

New York and Wisconsin have laws limiting the amount of water which may
be incorporated in Cheddar cheese. New York places the limit at 39 per
cent and Wisconsin at 40 per cent. If the moisture-content is above
this, the cheese must be branded adulterated.




CHAPTER XX

_MARKETING_


Marketing is related to cheese in two ways: First, the purchase of the
raw material, the milk; and secondly the sale of the finished product,
the cheese.

+321. Buying milk.+--The method of paying for the milk differs in the
various cheese sections and factories. At some factories a stated price
is paid for the milk or the fat. This is usually in terms of 100 pounds
of milk or for each pound of fat. This is the practice with concerns
possessing large capital. Other factories make the milk into cheese and
after each sale, the expenses necessary for operating the factory are
deducted and the remainder of the money divided among the patrons. This
money is divided either on the basis of the number of pounds of milk or
of fat delivered. The question arises as to which is the better method
to buy milk for cheese-making, or the fairest way to divide the money
received from a sale of cheese.

+322. Cheese yield basis of buying milk.+--Let us suppose that at a
cheese factory there were five patrons: (A) delivered 100 pounds of milk
testing 3 per cent fat; (B) 100 pounds of milk testing 3.5 per cent fat;
(C) 100 pounds of milk testing 4.0 per cent fat; (D) 100 pounds of milk
testing 4.5 per cent fat; and (E) 100 pounds of milk testing 5.0 per
cent fat. Table XXVI shows the actual number of pounds of cheese
containing 37 per cent moisture which 100 pounds of milk containing
different percentages of fat will produce. The cheese sold net for 20
cents a pound.

  TABLE XXVI

  SHOWING PAYMENTS FOR MILK BASED ON THE ACTUAL YIELD
  OF CHEESE

  =====================================================================
  PATRON |  POUNDS   | PER CENT  | YIELD OF CHEESE | PRICE A |  AMOUNT
         |  OF MILK  | OF FAT IN |   CONTAINING    |  POUND  | DUE EACH
         | DELIVERED |   MILK    |  37% MOISTURE   |         |  PATRON
  -------+-----------+-----------+-----------------+---------+---------
     A   |    100    |    3.0    |      8.30       |  $.20   |  $1.66
     B   |    100    |    3.5    |      9.45       |   .20   |   1.89
     C   |    100    |    4.0    |     10.60       |   .20   |   2.12
     D   |    100    |    4.5    |     11.74       |   .20   |   2.348
     E   |    100    |    5.0    |     12.90       |   .20   |   2.58
  -------+-----------+-----------+-----------------+---------+---------
   Total |    500    |   20      |     52.99       |   .20   |  10.598
  =====================================================================

This table shows the amount of money each patron should receive if the
money were divided on the basis of the actual yield of cheese.

+323. Fat basis for payment of milk.+--Let us suppose that the same five
patrons delivered the same quantity of milk testing the same percentages
of fat and that the cheese sold for the same price. A total of 20 pounds
of fat was delivered and the cheese sold for $10.598; by dividing this
amount by the pounds of fat delivered, the price or value of one pound
of fat is found to be $.5299. Multiplying the pounds of fat each patron
delivered by the price a pound would give the amount of money due each
patron.


  TABLE XXVII

  SHOWING PAYMENTS FOR MILK BASED ON FAT-CONTENT OF
  MILK

  ===================================================================
         |  POUNDS   | PER CENT  | POUNDS OF | VALUE OF |
  PATRON |  OF MILK  | OF FAT IN |    FAT    | POUND OF | AMOUNT DUE
         | DELIVERED |   MILK    | DELIVERED |    FAT   | EACH PATRON
  -------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------+------------
     A   |   100     |    3.0    |    3.0    |  $.5299  |  $1.58
     B   |   100     |    3.5    |    3.5    |   .5299  |   1.85
     C   |   100     |    4.0    |    4.0    |   .5299  |   2.12
     D   |   100     |    4.5    |    4.5    |   .5299  |   2.38
     E   |   100     |    5.0    |    5.0    |   .5299  |   2.65
  ===================================================================

+324. Weight basis or pooling method for payment of milk.+--By this
system, each patron would receive an equal price for 100 pounds of milk.
If the same supposition is taken as before, there would be 500 pounds of
milk delivered and the cheese sold for $10.59; each 100 pounds of milk
would be worth $2.12. As each patron delivered an equal weight of milk,
each would receive an equal amount of money, or $2.12.

+325. Fat-plus-two method for payment of milk.+--Some workers have
thought that by adding two to the fat test, the division of money would
be more nearly the true cheese-producing value of the milk. The amount
due each patron is figured as in the fat basis, except that two is added
to the fat test and this is used as the basis of division. If the same
suppositions were used as before, each patron would receive the amount
shown in Table XXVIII.

+326. Comparison of methods.+--The best way to judge the different
methods of paying for milk is to compare them with the true value based
on the actual cheese yield as shown in Table XXIX.


  TABLE XXVIII

  SHOWING PAYMENTS FOR MILK BY FAT-PLUS-TWO METHODS

  ===========================================================================
  PATRON |  POUNDS   | PER CENT  | FAT PLUS |  POUNDS   | VALUE OF |  AMOUNT
         | OF MILK   | OF FAT IN |   TWO    |  OF FAT   | POUND OF | DUE EACH
         | DELIVERED |   MILK    |          | DELIVERED |    FAT   |  PATRON
  -------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+----------+---------
     A   |   100     |    3.0    |   5.0    |    5.0    |  $.353   |  $1.76
     B   |   100     |    3.5    |   5.5    |    5.5    |   .353   |   1.94
     C   |   100     |    4.0    |   6.0    |    6.0    |   .353   |   2.12
     D   |   100     |    4.5    |   6.5    |    6.5    |   .353   |   2.29
     E   |   100     |    5.0    |   7.0    |    7.0    |   .353   |   2.47
  ===========================================================================


  TABLE XXIX

  SHOWING THE COMPARISON OF THE DIFFERENT METHODS
  OF PAYING FOR MILK AT CHEESE FACTORIES

  ================================================================
         |            | ERROR IN PAYMENT PER 100 POUNDS OF MILK BY
  PATRON | PERCENTAGE +----------------+-----------+--------------
         | OF FAT IN  | POOLING SYSTEM | FAT BASIS | FAT-PLUS-TWO
         |    MILK    |                |           |   METHOD
  -------+------------+----------------+-----------+--------------
     A   |    3.0     |    +$0.46      |  -$0.08   |   +$0.10
     B   |    3.5     |     +0.23      |   -0.04   |    +0.05
     C   |    4.0     |      0.00      |    0.00   |     0.00
     D   |    4.5     |     -0.23      |   +0.04   |    -0.05
     E   |    5.0     |     -0.46      |   +0.08   |    -0.10
  ================================================================

A careful study of the above table shows that the pooling system is in
favor of the dairy-man with the poor milk, and that the fat basis favors
the dairy-man with the rich milk. This is due, of course, to the fact
that the casein does not increase in the milk quite in proportion to the
fat. With the pooling system or fat basis of payment, no account is
taken of the casein; but the fat-plus-two system is an attempt to
recognize the casein, but considers the percentage of casein in all milk
to be the same. This method is in favor of the dairy-man with milk low
in fat, but not to the extent of the pooling system. The latter system
considers the cheese-producing power of all milk to be the same. It
favors the dairy-man with low-testing milk. The fat basis for payment
recognizes only the fat and is an advantage to the dairy-man with the
high-testing milk but not to the extent that the pooling system is in
favor of the low-testing milk. The fat-plus-two method recognizes 2 per
cent of casein in the milk. This favors the dairy-men with low-testing
milk. Other methods[136] of paying for milk have been devised. Because
the actual yield of cheese from the milk of different herds cannot be
easily determined at the cheese factory, this method of payment cannot
be employed. In localities in which all the dairy-men have the same
breed of cattle and there is not a wide variation in the fat percentage,
the fat basis is usually found to be the most satisfactory way to pay
for the milk.

+327. Laws governing the production and sale of milk.+--Many states have
laws regulating the sanitary conditions under which the milk may be
produced. These laws relate principally to the condition of the stables,
the health of the cow, the food given the cow, and the care of the milk.
The following law[137] of Wisconsin is a good example:

  "Adulterated milk, what constitutes. Section 4607a. In all
  prosecutions under the preceding section, or any other
  section of these statutes, or laws amendatory thereof or
  supplementary thereto, relating to the sale of adulterated
  milk or adulterated cream, the term adulterated milk shall
  mean: milk containing less than three per centum of milk
  fat, or milk containing less than eight and one-half per
  centum of milk solids not fat, or milk drawn from cows
  within eight days before or four days after parturition,
  or milk from which any part of the cream has been
  removed, or milk which has been diluted with water or any
  other fluid, or milk to which has been added or into which
  has been introduced any coloring matter or chemical or
  preservative or deleterious or filthy substance or any
  foreign substance whatsoever, or milk drawn from cows kept
  in a filthy or unhealthy condition, or milk drawn from any
  sick or diseased cow or cow having ulcers or other running
  sores, or milk drawn from cows fed unwholesome food, or
  milk in any stage of putrefaction, or milk contaminated by
  being kept in stables containing cattle or other animals.
  The term adulterated cream shall mean cream containing
  less than eighteen per centum of milk fat, or cream taken
  from milk drawn from cows within eight days before or four
  days after parturition, or cream from milk to which has
  been added or introduced any coloring matter or chemical
  or preservative or deleterious or filthy substance or any
  foreign substance whatsoever, or cream from milk drawn
  from cows kept in a filthy or unhealthy condition, or
  cream from milk drawn from any sick or diseased cow or cow
  having ulcers or other running sores, or cream from milk
  drawn from cows fed unwholesome food, or cream
  contaminated by being kept in stables containing cattle or
  other animals, or cream to which has been added or into
  which has been introduced any coloring matter or chemical
  or preservative or deleterious or filthy substance or any
  foreign substance whatsoever, or cream in any stage of
  putrefaction, provided, that nothing in this act shall be
  construed to prohibit the sale of pasteurized milk or
  cream to which viscogen or sucrate of lime has been added
  solely for the purpose of restoring the viscosity, if the
  same be distinctly labeled in such manner as to advise the
  purchaser of its true character; and providing that
  nothing in this act shall be construed as prohibiting the
  sale of milk commonly known as 'skimmed milk,' when the
  same is sold as and for 'skimmed milk.' Milk drawn from
  cows within eight days before or four days after
  parturition, or milk to which has been added or into which
  has been introduced any coloring matter or chemical or
  preservative or deleterious or filthy substance, or milk
  drawn from cows kept in a filthy or unclean condition, or
  milk drawn from any sick or diseased cow or cow having
  ulcers or other running sores, or milk drawn from cows
  fed unwholesome food, or milk contaminated by being kept
  in stables containing cattle or other animals and cream
  from any such milk, or cream in any stage of putrefaction
  are hereby declared to be unclean and unsanitary milk or
  unclean and unsanitary cream, as the case may be."

Most states have laws which determine the legal standard of milk. Any
one selling milk which does not meet this standard is liable to be
fined. The laws of most states prohibit the taking of anything from the
milk or the adding of anything to it. This prohibits the skimming and
watering. Skimmed-milk must be sold as such.

+328. Marketing of cheese.+--There are many different methods[138] of
selling cheese. Each is adapted to certain conditions and each has its
advantages and disadvantages. In cheese sections, the customary method
of selling is on the board of trade, which is the meeting of the
cheese-buyers and factory salesmen. They meet at a given place at a
certain day and hour each week. Every board has its officers. There are
different ways in which a board of trade may be operated. In some cases
there is a large blackboard divided into columns. In the first column,
the salesman writes the name of the factory and the number and kind of
cheese offered for sale. At the top of the other columns are the names
of the different cheese-buyers. The president usually opens the sale at
a stated time and asks that all cheese be placed on the blackboard. When
this is done he states that they are ready to receive bids on the
cheese. The buyers then write the price a pound they wish to pay
opposite each lot of cheese and in the column headed by their names.
After all the bids have been received and placed on the board, the
presiding officer states that a certain length of time, usually fifteen
minutes, will be given the salesman to withdraw his cheese if he does
not think a high enough price has been offered; this is indicated by the
salesman stepping to the blackboard and erasing the factory name and
number of boxes. At the close of the stated time, the presiding officer
declares the cheese offered on the board sold to the highest bidder. The
purchaser then gives the salesman directions for shipping.

Sometimes a board of trade has a committee of one member elected by the
factory salesmen and one elected by the cheese-buyers. These two members
elect a third and these three constitute the price committee. This
committee meets each week and determines what the price shall be. This
is known as the ruling. The factory salesmen and cheese-buyers then try
to make private sales. By this method no one, except the persons
concerned, knows exactly what price is paid for the cheese. Usually, a
price above the ruling is paid.

At Quebec, Canada, there is a cheese-selling organization with
government assistance. On paying a certain fee, any cheese factory may
join. All the factories belonging to the organization ship their cheese
to a central cold storage where the cheeses are examined and graded by a
government inspector. A cheese from each vat is tried. These cheeses are
separated into white and colored lots, then graded according to quality.
When the total number of cheeses in each lot is known, the lots are sold
at auction. The purchaser must accept the cheese as graded. The better
grades of cheese bring about the same price as on the market, but the
advantage lies in the selling of the lower grades. Ordinarily, the
purchaser takes advantage of the salesman when the cheeses are
undergrade. The success of this plan depends on the accuracy of the
person grading the cheese. This method seems to be growing in
popularity, because the cheese-buyer can purchase large amounts of
cheese at one time and be sure of the quality. A small fee, about
one-twelfth of a cent a pound, is charged for handling the cheese.
Similar organizations are in operation in Wisconsin. The boards of trade
and selling organizations deal almost entirely in Cheddar cheese.

+329. Mercantile exchanges.+--In the larger cities are exchanges where
cheese is bought and sold by jobbers. This cheese is mostly Cheddar. The
prices paid these jobbers tend to fix the daily price of cheese. These
prices are published daily, for example, in New York Price Current. Some
factories ship their cheese directly to these jobbers. The following are
the cheese rules of the New York Mercantile Exchange adopted May 4,
1915:

  CHEESE RULES OF THE NEW YORK MERCANTILE EXCHANGE

  Rule 1. At the first regular meeting of the Executive
  Committee in each year, the President shall appoint,
  subject to the approval of the Executive Committee, a
  Cheese Committee to consist of seven members of the
  Exchange, who are known as members of the cheese trade, to
  hold office until their successors are appointed. It shall
  be the duty of the Cheese Committee to formulate such
  rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
  government of transactions between members of the
  Exchange, and to revise the same as circumstances may
  require. Such rules and revisions shall be subject to the
  approval of the Executive Committee.

  Rule 2. All transactions in cheese between members of the
  Exchange shall be governed by the following rules, but
  nothing therein shall be construed as interfering, in any
  way, with the rights of members to make such special
  contracts or conditions as they may desire.

  Rule 3. If a sale is made from dock, or platform, or to
  arrive, the buyer shall assume the same relations toward
  the transportation line by which the cheese arrives, as
  the seller previously held as regards its removal from the
  place of delivery within the time granted by such lines
  for that purpose. Transactions between members of this
  Exchange shall be governed as follows: Any member
  negotiating for any lot of cheese belonging to another
  member, the price having been agreed upon, shall examine
  such lot of cheese within twenty-four (24) hours after
  such negotiation takes place. Failure to examine within
  said time releases the seller from any obligations to make
  delivery thereafter, if he so wishes.

  Rule 4. In the absence of special agreement, all cheese
  purchased "in store" shall be understood as being ready
  and designed for immediate delivery, but the buyer shall
  have twenty-four hours in which to have the cheese
  inspected, and weight tested, and shall not be liable for
  the storage and insurance, if removed within two days.

  Rule 5. When cheese are sold to arrive, or from depot or
  dock, the cheese must be accepted or rejected within six
  business hours after notice of actual arrival to buyer.
  Business hours shall be understood to be from 10 A.M. to 4
  P.M. If buyer rejects the same, he shall state the reasons
  for rejection. Should the rejection be considered unfair,
  the seller shall at once notify the buyer that he declines
  to accept such rejection; and he may call for a Committee,
  which shall be composed of three members of the cheese
  trade; the seller choosing one, the buyer one, and the
  third selected from the cheese trade by these two, or,
  they failing to agree, the third shall be appointed by the
  Chairman of the Committee on Cheese. The Examining
  Committee shall at once inspect the lot of cheese in
  dispute, sampling not less than five (5) per cent of each
  mark or factory, and they shall immediately give their
  decision in writing to both parties. Either party failing
  to abide by the decision of the Committee may be summoned
  by the other party before the Complaint Committee under
  Section 24 of the By-laws. The fees for each examination
  shall be six ($6) dollars, to be paid by the party
  adjudged to be in fault.

  Rule 6. The weight of all cheese shall be tested by a
  regularly appointed official weigher, and his certificates
  shall accompany the document conveying the title of the
  property. Said official weigher to be appointed by the
  Committee on Cheese, subject to the approval of the
  Executive Committee.

  Rule 7. The weigher's fee shall be twenty-five (25) cents
  per factory except where the owner requires more than ten
  (10) boxes be tested in which case the fee shall be fifty
  (50) cents, which shall be paid by the seller.

  Rule 8. Unless otherwise agreed upon in testing the weight
  of cheese, not less than five (5) boxes or more than ten
  (10) per cent of the whole lot shall be a test, and said
  test shall be considered good for three (3) business days,
  including day test is made.

  Rule 9. In testing weights, all over and short weights
  shall be taken into the average on each particular
  factory. Single Daisies shall be tested on half pounds,
  Double Daisies and all other sizes on even pounds.

  Rule 10. Where a lot of cheese is found to test irregular
  in weights, either the buyer or seller may require the
  entire lot to be reweighed. The charge for same shall be
  three (3) cents per box.

  Rule 11. Boxes of cheese which may be found largely at
  variance from original weights shall not enter into the
  average, but their weight shall be separately ascertained
  and certified to by the weigher.

  Rule 12. Where sales are made, and the buyer finds damaged
  or sour cheese in excess of fifteen (15) per cent it shall
  be optional with him to refuse or receive the remainder of
  the lot purchased. But, in the event of his accepting the
  remainder of the lot, the sour or damaged cheese shall
  revert to the seller.

  Rule 13. The Committee on Cheese shall appoint subject to
  the approval of the Executive Committee, a Cheese
  Inspector and also a Deputy Inspector, whose duties shall
  be, when called upon by members of the Exchange, to
  inspect the quality and condition of such lots of cheese
  as may be required and to render a certificate of such
  inspection. Where the cheese in the lots are reasonably
  uniform in quality, the examination of 10 per cent of the
  lot shall be considered sufficient, but this shall not
  prevent the Inspector examining a larger percentage of the
  lot, when he deems it necessary. The fee for inspection
  shall be fifty (50) cents for lots consisting of fifty
  (50) boxes or less. Lots exceeding fifty (50) boxes shall
  be one cent per box, which shall be collected from the
  member ordering the inspection.

  Rule 14. The Cheese Inspector's certificate shall be made
  to read as follows:


  NEW YORK MERCANTILE EXCHANGE

  _Cheese Inspector's Certificate_

  Inspection No.__________

  This is to certify that I have this day inspected for M___________
  the following cheese, now located at_____________________
  Factory and identification marks_________________________
  Quantity in lot__________________________________________boxes
  Quantity inspected_______________________________________boxes
  and find as follows:
  Flavor_______________________________________________________________
  Body and Texture_____________________________________________________
  Color________________________________________________________________
  Condition____________________________________________________________
  Boxes________________________________________________________________
  Grade________________________________________________________________
  Inspection charges________________

  _____________________________________Inspector_

  The certificate to have a blank margin of three inches at
  the bottom, for the purpose of inserting specifications of
  Institutions, also for cheese sold under the Call, so that
  the Inspector may certify that cheese inspected fill the
  requirements as specified and the Inspector shall brand
  one impression on both boxes and cheese.

  NEW YORK MERCANTILE EXCHANGE

  OFFICIAL INSPECTION

  Number_______________ Date___________________________

  ____________________________Inspector_

  Rule 16. The Weigher's Certificate shall be made to read
  as follows:

  This is to certify that the following is the actual test of ______
  boxes, out of shipment of ______ boxes

  Factory Mark___________________________________________

  Marked Weights_________________________________________

  Actual Weights_________________________________________

  Loss___________________________________________________

  Average loss_______________lbs. on________________boxes

  New York_____________________________19______

  ______________________ _Weigher_

  and the Cheese Rules numbered 6 to 11 inclusive be printed
  on the back thereof.

  Rule 17. Members offering cheese for sale under the Call
  shall describe each lot, as to number of boxes, color,
  texture (open or close made), body, flavor, size, and how
  boxed, section where made, whether whole milks or skims
  and the average weight of each lot. Cheese sold under the
  Call to be accepted, or rejected, as a good delivery, or
  otherwise, based on the description given at the sale.

  Rule 18. When cheese are sold under the Call, unless
  otherwise stated, they shall be ready for immediate
  shipment.

  Rule 19. All cheese offered under the Call, with
  Inspector's Certificate attached, shall be accompanied by
  such Certificate and be accepted by the buyer
  unconditionally, provided the cheese are branded according
  to Rule 13.

  Rule 20. When cheese are offered under the Call, without
  Inspector's Certificate, should the buyer not consider the
  cheese a good delivery, according to description by
  seller, he may notify the seller, and if the seller is
  unwilling to make another delivery, the buyer may call
  upon the Inspector to decide whether or not the delivery
  shall stand. If the Inspector decides it is a good
  delivery, the buyer shall accept the cheese. If the
  Inspector decides it is not a good delivery, then the
  seller shall have twenty-four (24) hours in which to make
  a good delivery. But if the seller, after twenty-four (24)
  hours, fails to make a good delivery, then the buyer shall
  notify the Superintendent of the Exchange, who shall
  collect a penalty of three per cent of the amount of the
  transaction, the Exchange retaining twenty-five per cent
  of this sum, and seventy-five per cent shall be paid to
  the buyer.

  Rule 21. Spot sales under the Call shall be for spot cash
  unless otherwise agreed.

  Rule 22. All failures in meeting contracts shall be
  reported to the Superintendent of the Exchange, and
  announced at next regular session of the Exchange.

+330. Marketing perishable varieties.+--Soft cheeses, such as Cream,
Neufchâtel, Cottage, are usually sold to jobbers or directly to retail
stores. They have a very short commercial life, hence cannot be held
long before delivery to the consumer. From the jobber, cheese usually
goes to the wholesale grocer and then to the retail dealer and finally
the consumer. Most jobbers have cold storages so that they can hold
cheese without injury to quality. (See Fig. 74.) The kind of cheese
marketed in any locality depends on the tastes of the residents. For
example, the South usually desires a highly colored product, thinking
this color indicates more fat; in the Cheddar group New England demands
a soft pasty quick-curing cheese, thinking that softness is a sign of
more fat and richness; England wants a rather dry, well-cured, highly
flavored cheese. Canadian Cheddar cheese has been standardized as far
as possible to appeal to the English market. A long ripening period
keeps capital tied up through the further time required for delivery.
This has led to the sale of much of the cheese almost or entirely
unripe. So much of the product has reached the consumer without
characteristic varietal flavor that large numbers have acquired the
habit of purchasing and even preferring cheese only partly ripe.

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--A cheese cold storage room.]

The time during which cheese should be held at the factory depends on
the variety. Some are shipped as soon as made, including those cheeses
with sour-milk flavor only. Others have to be cured in the factory from
six to eight weeks. Cheeses in paper or tin-foil should be neatly
wrapped and carefully put in the boxes. The box of cheese should be
neat, clean and attractive. Cheeses not wrapped should have a firm rind
to hold them in shape. The boxes should be clean and the weight of
cheese neatly and plainly marked. In the case of Cheddar cheese, it may
be paraffined at the factory, but if not, this is usually done at the
cold storage of the jobber. The cheeses usually have some time to cure
or ripen while being handled by the various dealers.

+331. Distribution of price.+--The final selling price of cheese is a
composite of all the changes that have gone before; or conversely, the
farmer, the maker, the carrier and the distributors (wholesale, jobbing
and retail dealers) must all be paid from the final price of the
product. A study of this problem in Wisconsin has been made by Hibbard,
and Hobson.[139] The general facts as determined for Wisconsin have
fairly wide application to the manufacture and sale of cheese.

Economic success in handling cheese is dependent on proper provision for
the sale of the product. Where the output is small, a personal market
can be created and maintained. This eliminates all profits intervening
between the maker and the retailer. If the business reaches a volume
beyond the possibilities of direct sale to the retailer, some selling
organization is necessary. Where the number of producers is great and
the selling machinery is well organized, the cheese factory becomes a
producer of a commodity which is turned over to existing selling
agencies. This condition is well established for Cheddar, Swiss, Brick
and Limburger cheese. The soft cheeses other than Limburger have thus
far been handled principally by large companies, each of which has
developed an expensive selling organization. A study of the map (Fig.
65) shows how the cheese industry is localized in particular sections of
certain states. Individual factories have maintained themselves in
widely separated places. This localization is due to the geographical
conditions which make certain regions specially adapted to dairying,
modified by the proximity to markets for milk as milk. There are many
regions, however, well adapted to cheese production in which there is no
development of the industry at present. New developments are now taking
place in the mountain areas of the South, notably North Carolina and
adjacent states, and in several centers of the western mountain states.
Many other areas should develop the making of cheese in some form.

The actual costs of making and selling cheese were found by the
Wisconsin investigators to vary approximately as follows: (1) cost of
making, 1.2 to 1.75 cents; (2) storage, 1/8 cent a pound a month, or
3/8 to ½ cent for the season; (3) transportation to distant points,
$.20 to $2.50 for 100 pounds according to distance; (4) the local
dealer, about 1 cent a pound; (5) the wholesale dealer, 2 cents; (6) the
jobber or broker who occasionally intervenes, about 1/8 to ¼ cent; and
the retailer, 5.5 to 9 cents. The entire cost of selling at the time
this investigation was made represented about one-half of the retail
price of the cheese. The producer of milk received the other half of
that price.

+332. Standards.+--Legal standards in the United States are thus far
largely based on the specifications of American Cheddar. In so far as
they are applied to other products, they operate merely to prevent or
reduce the use of skimmed-milk. The analyses and limits proposed in the
discussion of varieties or groups in this book represent the range of
composition actually known to be associated with cheeses of typical
quality. Efforts are now being made to establish definitions and
standards of composition which will limit the use of cheese names to
products conforming to the requirements for such varieties. Practically
the only federal requirement thus far enforced in the United States is
that 50 per cent of the water-free substance of the cheese must be
milk-fat. Various states have local requirements but most of them
include the federal rule as to fat. New York and Wisconsin now restrict
the amount of water in Cheddar cheese to 40 per cent. Most states have
laws regulating the manufacture and sale of skimmed-milk cheese.

+333. Laws relating to cheese marketing.+--A cheese of foreign origin if
made in this country must be branded to show that it is not imported.
For example, Camembert made in America is labeled Domestic Camembert.
Some manufacturers call it Camembert type of cheese. The same applies to
other varieties of foreign cheese. If a variety is made under a
trade-marked name, this prevents any other manufacturer from using that
name. For example, a concern may make "Philadelphia" cream cheese; other
concerns may make cream cheese, but they must call it by some other
name.

The committee on definitions and standards for the Association of
Official Agricultural Chemists has now undertaken to define the proper
use of type names. This is intended to determine the proper limits of
composition of cheeses in each variety and such essentials of physical
identification as will insure the proper use of these names.

Certain states have laws which relate to the branding of the cheese to
denote quality. If the cheese is made from whole milk, a brand may be
applied to show this fact. This is usually called the state brand. If
made from skimmed-milk, the cheese must be branded to show this. The
following[140] illustrate the laws relating to the state brand and
skimmed-milk cheese:

  Sec. 48. Manufacturer's brand of cheese. "Every
  manufacturer of whole-milk cheese may put a brand or label
  upon such cheese indicating 'whole-milk cheese' and the
  date of the month and year when made; and no person shall
  use such a brand or label upon any cheese made from milk
  from which any of the cream has been taken. The
  Commissioner of Agriculture shall procure and issue to the
  cheese manufacturers of the state, on proper application
  therefor, and under such regulations as to the custody and
  use thereof as he may prescribe, a uniform stencil brand
  or labels bearing a suitable device or motto, and the
  words 'New York state whole-milk cheese.' Every such
  brand or label shall be used upon the outside of the
  cheese and shall bear a different number for each separate
  factory. The commissioner shall keep a book, in which
  shall be registered the name, location and number of each
  manufactory using the brands or labels, and the name or
  names of the persons at each manufactory authorized to use
  the same. No such brand or labels shall be used upon any
  other than whole-milk cheese or packages containing the
  same. (As amended by chapter 207 of the Laws of 1910.)

  Sec. 49. Use of false brand prohibited; branding of
  skim-milk cheese regulated. No person shall offer, sell or
  expose for sale, in any package, butter or cheese which is
  falsely branded or labeled. No person shall sell, offer or
  expose for sale cheese commonly known as Cheddar cheese
  made from skimmed or partially skimmed milk unless the
  same is branded to show that it is skim-milk cheese. All
  such cheese so sold, offered or exposed for sale shall be
  branded with the words 'skim-milk cheese,' or if such
  cheese contains thirteen per centum of milk fat or over,
  it may be branded 'medium skim-milk cheese,' or if it
  contains eighteen per centum of milk fat or over, it may
  be branded 'special skim-milk cheese.' Such branding shall
  be upon the sides of both the cheese and the container.
  The branding herein provided shall be in block letters at
  least one-half an inch square. (As amended by chapter 456
  of the Laws of 1913.)"

Filled cheeses are those from which the milk-fat has been removed and
other animal fats substituted. The laws of some states prohibit the
manufacture of this product. The federal law relating to filled cheese
permits its manufacture under license, taxes and government inspection.

The various states have laws regulating the length of time that the
cheese may be held in cold storage.

Another important law in some states requires the cheese-maker to have a
license. He must pass an examination to show that the principles and
practices of cheese-making are understood.




CHAPTER XXI

_CHEESE IN THE HOUSEHOLD_


Although cheese in some form is familiar to every household, it has been
widely regarded in America as an accessory, almost a condimental
substance rather than as a staple food worthy of comparison with meat or
eggs. Statistics of the annual production, importation and exportation
of cheese indicate that the total consumption in the United States is
about 300,000,000 pounds--perhaps three pounds per capita. The household
manufacture and consumption of cottage cheese would add a small amount
to these figures.

Cheese is used as a staple source of food values among many peoples of
Europe. Such use of cheese increases rather than decreases with the
density of the population. France with a small fraction of the land area
and one-half the population of the United States produces and consumes
about the same amount of cheese. In America, cheese-making has been
developed with the advance of settlement into unoccupied territories
only to be dropped as increasing population produced greater demands for
milk in other forms. If cheese had been accepted as a regular part of
the food supply in such communities, some form of cheese-making would
have survived the economic changes.

+334. Food value of cheese.+--A consideration of the nutritive
components of cheese shows it to be a rich source of fat, protein or
both, according to the variety under examination. It is low in
carbohydrates, and aside from salt (sodium chloride) compares favorably
with other substances in mineral constituents. The following discussion
with an amplified table is taken from Langworthy and Hunt:[141]

"In order, however, that the question of the use of cheese in the diet
may be adequately discussed, knowledge of its composition in comparison
with other foods is desirable, and there is an abundance of data
available on this subject, since the composition of cheese and other
foods has often been investigated at the Department of Agriculture, in
experiment station laboratories and in many other places where nutrition
problems are studied. An extended summary of analyses of cheese of
different sorts is included in an earlier publication of this
department.[142]

"Data regarding the composition of cheese and a few other common foods
are summarized in the following table.

"It will be seen from the table (Table XXX) that cheese has nearly twice
as much protein, weight for weight, as beef of average composition as
purchased and that its fuel value is more than twice as great. It
contains over 25 per cent more protein than the same weight of
porterhouse steak as purchased, and nearly twice as much fat.

"As shown by the figures in the following table, cheese contains 3.8 per
cent ash. Of this a considerable part may be salt added in
cheese-making. Like the milk from which it is made, cheese ash is
characterized chiefly by the presence of calcium (lime), magnesium,
phosphorus and iron, the average values as given in earlier bulletins of
the department[145] being 1.24 per cent calcium oxid, 0.049 per cent
magnesium oxid, 1.49 per cent phosphorus pentoxid, and 0.0015 per cent
iron."

  TABLE XXX

  AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF CHEESE AND SOME OTHER COMMON FOODS AS PURCHASED,
  AND ALSO ON THE BASIS OF EDIBLE PORTION

  ====================================================================
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
    FOOD MATERIALS      | REFUSE | WATER | PROTEIN | FAT  |  CARBO   |
                        |        |       |         |      | HYDRATES |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  ----------------------+--------+-------+---------+------+----------+
                        |   %    |   %   |    %    |  %   |    %     |
  Cheese, American      |        |       |         |      |          |
  Cheddar[144]          |   --   | 34.2  |  25.2   | 33.7 |   2.4    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Beef of average       |        |       |         |      |          |
  composition           |        |       |         |      |          |
  as purchased          |  18.6  | 50.5  |  15.2   | 15.5 |    --    |
    Edible portion      |   --   | 62.2  |  18.8   | 18.8 |    --    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Porterhouse steak     |        |       |         |      |          |
  as purchased          |  12.7  | 52.4  |  19.1   | 17.9 |    --    |
    Edible portion      |   --   | 60.0  |  21.9   | 20.4 |    --    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Loin steak, broiled,  |        |       |         |      |          |
  edible portion        |   --   | 54.8  |  23.5   | 20.4 |    --    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Dried beef            |   --   | 53.7  |  26.4   |  6.9 |    --    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Eggs as purchased     |  11.2  | 65.5  |  13.1   |  9.3 |    --    |
    Edible portion      |   --   | 73.7  |  13.4   | 10.5 |    --    |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Milk                  |   --   | 87.0  |   3.3   |  4.0 |    5.0   |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Bread                 |   --   | 35.3  |   9.2   |  1.3 |   53.1   |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Potatoes as purchased |  20.0  | 62.6  |   1.8   |   .1 |   14.7   |
    Edible portion      |   --   | 78.3  |   2.2   |   .1 |   18.4   |
                        |        |       |         |      |          |
  Apples as purchased   |  25.0  | 63.6  |    .3   |   .3 |   10.8   |
    Edible portion      |   --   | 84.6  |    .4   |   .5 |   14.2   |
  ====================================================================


  =====================================================
                        |      |          |   FUEL
                        |      |  FUEL    |  VALUE
    FOOD MATERIALS      | ASH  |  VALUE   | COMPARED
                        |      |   PER    |    TO
                        |      |  POUND   | CHEESE[143]
  ----------------------+------+----------+------------
                        |   %  | Calories |
  Cheese, American      |      |          |
  Cheddar[144]          |  3.8 |   1,950  |  1.00
                        |      |          |
  Beef of average       |      |          |
  composition           |      |          |
  as purchased          |   .7 |     935  |  0.48
    Edible portion      |   .9 |   1,145  |  0.58
                        |      |          |
  Porterhouse steak     |      |          |
  as purchased          |   .8 |   1,110  |  0.57
    Edible portion      |  1.0 |   1,270  |  0.65
                        |      |          |
  Loin steak, broiled,  |      |          |
  edible portion        |  1.2 |   1,300  |  0.66
                        |      |          |
  Dried beef            |  8.9 |     790  |  0.45
                        |      |          |
  Eggs as purchased     |   .9 |     635  |  0.32
    Edible portion      |  1.0 |     720  |  0.37
                        |      |          |
  Milk                  |   .7 |     310  |  0.16
                        |      |          |
  Bread                 |  1.1 |   1,215  |  0.62
                        |      |          |
  Potatoes as purchased |   .8 |     295  |  0.15
    Edible portion      |  1.0 |     385  |  0.20
                        |      |          |
  Apples as purchased   |   .3 |     190  |  0.10
    Edible portion      |   .3 |     290  |  0.15
  =====================================================


It is clear from the calculations shown in the last column, that Cheddar
cheese takes first rank among the foods compared as to fuel value. The
estimate of food values in terms of calories may not completely express
the value of that food to a particular individual. It is generally
conceded that one great function of food is the production of energy and
this function is probably more closely determined by the number of
calories produced than in any other known way. Such calculation has
become an essential factor in the preparation of dietaries. The
calculation here given necessarily applies only to Cheddar cheese. By
easy use of the last column, the caloric value of this cheese can be
compared with that of any competing food and the relative economy
determined, whatever the price asked. Another recent calculation with
reference[146] to the same cheese follows:

"One pound of American Cheddar cheese contains as much protein as--

  1.57 pounds of sirloin steak.
  1.35 pounds of round steak.
  1.89 pounds of fowl.
  1.79 pounds of smoked ham.
  1.81 pounds of fresh ham.

"In order to judge the value of foods fairly not only the protein but
the energy also must be compared. To supply energy cheese is one of the
best of food products. On the basis of energy supplied, 1 pound of
cheese equals--

  1.98 pounds of sirloin steak.
  2.61 pounds of round steak.
  2.52 pounds of fowl.
  1.17 pounds of smoked ham.
  1.29 pounds of fresh ham."

All these discussions have applied to whole-milk Cheddar cheese. With
minor reductions, much the same figures will hold for Swiss, Limburger,
Brick, Munster, Edam.

On the other hand, very little has been published until recently on the
skimmed-milk cheeses. The food value lost in skimmed-milk has at times
been enormous. Many households purchase milk by the bottle, use the
top-milk as cream and lose a part of the remainder. Similarly creameries
have wasted tons of skimmed-milk. The recovery of the protein of this
milk for human food is both good economy and an important addition to
the dietary. The United States Department of Agriculture has recently
published the following: "Cottage cheese is richer in protein than most
meats and is very much cheaper. Every pound contains more than three
ounces of protein, the source of nitrogen for body building. It is a
valuable source of energy also, though not so high as foods with more
fat. It follows that its value in this respect can be greatly increased
by serving it with cream, as is so commonly done."

It is an open question whether the decline of cheese-making in America
is not due to our failure to develop the use of skim and part-skim
cheeses. The whole-milk cheeses are very rich in fat. Use of such cheese
in quantity in connection with ordinary foods quickly leads to the
ingestion of too much fat. The skimmed-milk cheeses are primarily
protein food and as such substitutes for lean meat.

"The following table shows that cottage cheese is much cheaper than
most meats in furnishing protein for the diet.

"For supplying protein, one pound of cottage cheese equals:

  1.27 pounds sirloin steak.
  1.09 pounds round steak.
  1.37 pounds chuck rib beef.
  1.52 pounds fowl.
  1.46 pounds fresh ham.
  1.44 pounds smoked ham.
  1.58 pounds loin pork chop.
  1.31 pounds hind leg of lamb.
  1.37 pounds breast of veal.

"In addition to protein, energy for performing body work must be
furnished by food. As a source of energy also, cottage cheese is cheaper
than most meats at present prices. The following table shows the
comparison when energy is considered.

"On the basis of energy supplied, one pound of cottage cheese equals:

  8-1/3   ounces sirloin steak.
  11¼     ounces round steak.
  11¼     ounces chuck rib beef.
  10¾     ounces fowl.
  5½      ounces fresh ham.
  5       ounces smoked ham.
  6       ounces loin pork chop.
  7-1/3   ounces hind leg of lamb.
  12¾     ounces breast of veal."

+335. Digestibility of cheese.+--Although it has been a staple food with
many races for uncounted years, there is a widespread belief that cheese
is suitable for use chiefly in small quantities as an accessory to the
diet, and that in large quantities it is likely to produce physiological
disturbances. The question of digestibility was made the subject of a
special investigation by the United States Department of
Agriculture.[147] Calorimeter experiments[148] were made to test the
digestibility of several varieties of cheese and some of these varieties
at various stages of ripening. All forms of cheese were found to be
digested as completely as most of the usual forms of food. Approximately
90 per cent of the nitrogenous portion (casein) was retained in the
body. Unripe cheese in these experiments was apparently digested as
completely as the ripened forms. These experiments make clear the
possibility of making cheese a more prominent article in the regular
dietary than is usual in America. They especially point to the
desirability of the use of the skim and partially skim cheeses, which as
cheap sources of protein when properly combined with other foods, may be
made to replace meats as a less costly source of proteins. Cheese is
then to be classed with meat and eggs, not with condiments. An ounce of
Cheddar[149] cheese roughly is equivalent to one egg, to a glass of
milk, or to two ounces of meat. It is properly to be combined with
bread, potatoes and other starchy foods, lacking in the fat in which the
cheese is rich. These experiments included Roquefort, fresh-made and
ripe Cheddar, Swiss, Camembert and Cottage cheese.

+336. Cheese flavor.+--"Cheese owes its flavor to the fatty acids and
their compounds which it contains and to ammonia-like bodies formed
during ripening from the cleavage of the casein, to salt added to the
curd, and in some varieties, like Roquefort, to bodies elaborated by
molds which develop in the cheese. In the highly flavored sorts some of
the fatty acids of a very marked odor are present in abundance, as are
also the ammonia-like bodies. Indeed, in eating such cheese as Camembert
a trace of ammonia flavor may often be plainly detected.

"The cleavage of the nitrogenous material of the cheese and other
changes are brought about chiefly by the action of enzymes originally
present in cheese or by micro-organisms and are to be regarded as
fermentative and not as putrefactive changes.

"The liking for highly flavored cheeses of strong odor is a matter of
individual preference, but from the chemist's standpoint there is no
reason for the statement often made that such cheeses have undergone
putrefactive decomposition."

+337. Relation to health.+--In connection with the use of cheese as a
food, its relation to the health of the consumer must be considered. The
presence of the bacillus of tuberculosis in milk has led to careful
study of its possible presence in cheese. When American Cheddar cheese
was specially inoculated for this purpose, the living organism was
recovered from it after about five months by Schroeder of the United
States Department of Agriculture. This danger is much greater from
cheeses, such as Cream and Neufchâtel, which are eaten when
comparatively freshly made. The disease has been produced in guinea pigs
from such cheese often enough to emphasize the desirability of
developing methods of making every variety possible from thoroughly
pasteurized milk. This would remove the danger of tuberculosis and with
it eliminate the possibility of transmitting other diseases.

+338. Cheese poisoning+[150] cases occasionally occur. These take two
main forms: (1) an enteritis (caused by _Bacillus enteritidis_) or some
other member of that series which while painful and accompanied by
purging is rarely fatal; (2) acute toxæmias which, although rare,
usually result in death. From the latter type a variety of _Bacillus
botulinus_, an organism usually associated with meat poisoning, was
isolated by the New York State Department of Health. The occurrence of
such cases is frequent enough to emphasize the desirability of using
every precaution to reduce the number of bacteria that are allowed to
enter milk when drawn and to prevent the development of those which
actually gain access to it. When possible, pasteurization should be
introduced.

+339. Proper place in the diet.+--It has already been noted that cheese
is used "in general in two ways--in small quantities chiefly for its
flavor and in large quantities for its nutritive value as well as for
its flavor. Some varieties of cheese are used chiefly for the first
purpose, others chiefly for the second. Those which are used chiefly for
their flavor, many of which are high priced, contribute little to the
food value of the diet, because of the small quantity used at a time.
They have an important part to play, however, in making the diet
attractive and palatable. The intelligent housekeeper thinks of them not
as necessities, but as lying within what has been called 'the region of
choice.' Having first satisfied herself that her family is receiving
sufficient nourishment, she then, according to her means and ideas of an
attractive diet, chooses among these foods and others which are to be
considered luxuries.

"Those cheeses, on the other hand, which are suitable to be eaten in
large quantities and which are comparatively low priced are important
not only from the point of view of flavor, but also from the point of
view of their nutritive value." Among such cheeses are American Cheddar,
Swiss, Brick, Limburger and the lower priced forms of Neufchâtel.

It is clear that in buying cheese, the housekeeper should know
definitely the dietary purpose of the purchase, and then choose the
variety of cheese best suited. To a very large degree the personal
tastes of the family determine the kinds of cheese which will be
tolerated when served uncooked. In some families, the strong flavors of
Roquefort or Limburger are not acceptable. However, there is a range of
choice in which much judgment can be used. Cheese to be served with
mild-flavored foods should as a rule be also mild-flavored. For most
sandwiches, for example, Cheddar or Swiss is usually very acceptable;
Brick or partly ripe Limburger still hard enough to slice cuts into thin
rectangular slices and is very attractive to many consumers because it
has somewhat more flavor without being too strong. With proper handling
it is good policy to buy the cheapest of these forms for this purpose.
The selection of dessert cheeses offers the widest range. If served with
mild-flavored crackers, very many persons prefer Cream, Neufchâtel or
mild Cheddar; a little stronger taste calls for club cheese, or
Camembert. If tobacco smoke is present, Roquefort, Gorgonzola, Limburger
and related types will satisfy many consumers better than mild cheeses.
The intensity of flavor to be sought in the cheese should thus be
adjusted to the food served with it. A person with an aversion to
strong-smelling or strong-tasting cheese has been frequently known to
approve over-ripe Camembert, or Limburger when served without label but
spread upon a ginger cracker.

For cooking purposes, some recipes prescribe cheese of special quality.
In large markets, old Cheddar ripened carefully for two or three years
is commonly purchasable for Welsh rabbit. (Ask for "rabbit" cheese.) An
expert housekeeper familiar also with cheese ripening has demonstrated
that almost any cheese, whether ripened to its best, part ripe or
over-ripe, can be used in many cooking formulas without injuring the
acceptability of the product to most consumers. In canning Camembert, it
has been shown[151] that over-ripe cheese so strong as to be
objectionable, when sterilized loses the objectionable flavor of the raw
product. No cheese should be wasted; any not used when served the first
time should be served at a closely following meal or used in cooking. No
matter what the variety, it will add to the food value and palatability
of some one of the common dishes served within forty-eight hours.

+340. Care of cheese.+[152]--"One of the best ways of keeping cheese
which has been cut is to wrap it in a slightly damp cloth and then in
paper, and to keep it in a cool place. To dampen the cloth, sprinkle it
and then wring it. It should seem hardly damp to the touch. Paraffin
paper may be used in place of the cloth. When cheese is put in a covered
dish, the air should never be wholly excluded, for if this is done, it
molds more readily.

"In some markets it is possible to buy small whole cheeses. These may be
satisfactorily kept by cutting a slice from the top, to serve as a
cover, and removing the cheese as needed with a knife, a strong spoon,
or a cheese scoop. It is possible to buy at the hardware stores knobs
which inserted in the layer cut from the top make it easy to handle.
The cheese with the cover on should be kept wrapped in a cloth."

+341. Food value and price.+--There is little relation between the price
and food value of standard varieties of cheese. The higher-priced
varieties claim and hold their place because they possess particular
flavors. These may or may not accompany high comparative food values.
Even among low-priced varieties discrimination into grades is largely
based on flavor. Of the low-priced cheeses, those made from skimmed-milk
commonly command the lowest prices. As noted above, a choice may be
based either on purpose or on price. If the purpose is fixed, the price
should not change the selection. If, however, a particular quality of
cheese is purchasable at a low price, some satisfactory form of
utilizing it is clearly available to the housekeeper. Some standard
recipes are given in the following paragraphs.

+342. Methods and recipes for using cheese.+--(1) As a meat substitute.
Meat is wholesome and relished by most persons, yet it is not essential
to a well-balanced meal and there are many housekeepers who for one
reason or another are interested in lessening the amount of meat or to
substitute other foods. The problem with the average family is
undoubtedly more often the occasional substitution of other palatable
dishes for the sake of variety, for reasons of economy, or for some
other reason than the general replacement of meat dishes by other
things.

Foods which are to be served in place of meat should be rich in protein
and fat and should also be savory. Cheese naturally suggests itself as a
substitute for meat, since it is rich in the same kinds of nutrients
that meat supplies, is a staple food with which every one is familiar
and is one which can be used in a great variety of ways. In
substituting cheese for meat, especial pains should be taken to serve
dishes which are relished by the members of the family. A number of
recipes[153] for dishes which contain cheese are given below. They are
preceded by several recipes for cheese sauces which, as will appear, are
called for in the preparation of some of the more substantial dishes. In
the first list of recipes, cheese means Cheddar.

  Cheese Sauce No. 1

  1 cupful of milk.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  1 ounce of cheese (¼ cupful of grated cheese).
  Salt and pepper.

  Thicken the milk with the flour and just before serving
  add the cheese, stirring until it is melted.

  This sauce is suitable to use in preparing creamed eggs,
  or to pour over toast, making a dish corresponding to
  ordinary milk toast, except for the presence of cheese. It
  may be seasoned with a little curry powder and poured over
  hard-boiled eggs.


  Cheese Sauce No. 2

  Same as cheese sauce No. 1, except that the cheese is
  increased from 1 to 2 ounces.

  This sauce is suitable for using with macaroni or rice, or
  for baking with crackers soaked in milk.


  Cheese Sauce No. 3

  Same as cheese sauce No. 1, except that two cupfuls of
  grated cheese or 8 ounces are used. This may be used upon
  toast as a substitute for Welsh rabbit.


  Cheese Sauce No. 4

  Same as cheese sauce No. 2, save that 2 tablespoonfuls of
  melted butter are mixed with the flour before the latter
  is put into the milk. This sauce is therefore very rich in
  fat and has only a mild flavor of cheese.


Among the recipes for dishes which may be used like meat, the following
give products which, eaten in usual quantities, will provide much the
same kind and amount of nutritive material as the ordinary servings of
meat dishes used at dinner. In several cases there is a resemblance in
appearance and flavor to common meat dishes, which would doubtless be a
point in their favor with many families.


(2) For general cooking purposes:

  Cheese Fondue No. 1

  1-1/3 cupfuls of soft, stale bread crumbs.

  6 ounces of cheese (1½ cupfuls of grated cheese or
  1-1/3 cupfuls of cheese grated fine or cut into small
  pieces).

  4 eggs.

  1 cupful of hot water.

  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

Mix the water, bread crumbs, salt and cheese; add the yolks
thoroughly beaten; into this mixture cut and fold the whites of
eggs beaten until stiff. Pour into a buttered baking dish and
cook 30 minutes in a moderate oven. Serve at once.

The food value of this dish, made with the above quantities,
is almost exactly the same as that of a pound of beef of average
composition and a pound of potatoes combined. It contains
about 80 grams of proteids and has a fuel value of about 1300
calories.


  Cheese Fondue No. 2

  1-1/3 cupfuls of hot milk.

  1-1/3 cupfuls of soft, stale bread crumbs.

  1 tablespoonful of butter.

  4 eggs.

  1/3 of a pound of cheese (1-1/3 cupfuls of grated cheese
  or 1 cupful of cheese cut into small pieces).

  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Prepare as in previous recipe.

The protein value of this dish is equal to that of 1-1/8 pounds of
potato and beef, the fuel value, however, being much in excess of these.

In making either of these fondues, rice or other cereals may be
substituted for bread crumbs. One-fourth cupful of rice measured before
cooking, or one cupful of cooked rice or other cereals, should be used.


  Corn and Cheese Soufflé

  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 tablespoonful of chopped green pepper.
  ¼ cupful of flour.
  2 cupfuls of milk.
  1 cupful of chopped corn.
  1 cupful of grated cheese,
  3 eggs.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Melt the butter and cook the pepper thoroughly in it. Make
  a sauce out of the flour, milk and cheese; add the corn,
  cheese, yolks and seasoning; cut and fold in the whites
  beaten stiffly; turn into a buttered baking dish and bake
  in a moderate oven 30 minutes.

  Made with skimmed-milk and without butter, this dish has a
  food value slightly in excess of a pound of beef and a
  pound of potatoes.


  Cheese Soufflé

  2 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  3 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ½ cupful of milk (scalded).
  ½ teaspoonful of salt
  A speck of cayenne.
  ¼ cupful of grated cheese.
  3 eggs.

  Melt the butter; add the flour and, when well mixed, add
  gradually the scalded milk. Then add salt, cayenne and
  cheese. Remove from the fire and add the yolks of the
  eggs, beaten until lemon colored. Cool the mixture and
  fold into it the whites of the eggs, beaten until stiff.
  Pour into a buttered baking dish and cook 20 minutes in a
  slow oven. Serve at once.

  The proteid of this recipe is equal to that of half a
  pound of beef; the fuel value is equal to that of
  three-fourths of a pound.


Welsh Rabbit

  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 teaspoonful of corn-starch.
  ½ cupful of milk.
  ½ pound of cheese, cut into small pieces.
  ¼ teaspoonful each of salt and mustard.
  A speck of cayenne pepper.

  Cook the corn-starch in the butter; then add the milk
  gradually and cook two minutes; add the cheese and stir
  until it is melted. Season and serve on crackers or bread
  toasted on one side, the rabbit being poured over the
  untoasted side. Food value is that of about three-fourths
  of a pound of beef.


  Macaroni and Cheese No. 1

  1 cupful of macaroni, broken into small pieces.
  2 quarts of boiling salted water.
  1 cupful of milk.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ¼ to ½ pound of cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  Speck of cayenne pepper.

  Cook the macaroni in the boiling salted water, drain in a
  strainer, and pour cold water over it to prevent the
  pieces from adhering to each other. Make a sauce out of
  the flour, milk, and cheese. Put the sauce and macaroni in
  alternate layers in a buttered baking dish, cover with
  buttered crumbs, and heat in oven until crumbs are brown.


  Macaroni and Cheese No. 2

  A good way to prepare macaroni and cheese is to make a
  rich cheese sauce and heat the macaroni in it. The mixture
  is usually covered with buttered crumbs and browned in the
  oven. The advantage of this way of preparing the dish,
  however, is that it is unnecessary to have a hot oven, as
  the sauce and macaroni may be reheated on the top of the
  stove.


Baked Rice and Cheese No. 1

  1 cupful of uncooked rice and
  4 cupfuls of milk;
      or,
  3 cupfuls of cooked rice and
  1 cupful of milk.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ½ pound of cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  If uncooked rice is used, it should be cooked in 3 cupfuls
  of milk. Make a sauce with one cupful of milk, add the
  flour, cheese and salt. Into a buttered baking dish put
  alternate layers of the cooked rice and the sauce. Cover
  with buttered crumbs and bake until the crumbs are brown.
  The proteids in this dish, made with rice cooked in milk,
  are equal to those of nearly 1¾ pounds of average beef.
  If skimmed-milk is used, the fuel value is equal to nearly
  3½ pounds of beef. Whole milk raises the fuel value
  still higher.


  Fried Bread with Cheese No. 1

  6 slices of bread.
  1 cupful of milk.
  2 ounces of cheese, or ½ cupful of grated cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  ½ teaspoonful of potassium bicarbonate.
  Butter or other fat for frying.

  Scald the milk with the potassium bicarbonate; add the
  grated cheese, and stir until it dissolves. Dip the bread
  in this mixture and fry it in the butter. The potassium
  bicarbonate helps to keep the cheese in solution. It is
  desirable, however, to keep the milk hot while the bread
  is being dipped.


  Plain Cheese Salad

  Cut Edam or ordinary American cheese into thin pieces,
  scatter them over lettuce leaves and serve with French
  dressing.


  Olive and Pimiento Sandwich or Salad Cheese

  Mash any of the soft cream cheeses and add chopped olives
  and pimientos in equal parts. This mixture requires much
  salt to make it palatable to most palates, the amount
  depending chiefly on the quantity of pimiento used. The
  mixture may be spread between thin slices of bread or it
  may be made into a roll or molded, cut into slices and
  served on lettuce leaves with French dressing.


  Cheese and Tomato Salad

  Stuff cold tomatoes with cream cheese and serve on lettuce
  leaves with French dressing.


  Cheese and Pimiento Salad

  Stuff canned pimientos with cream cheese, cut into slices
  and serve one or two slices to each person on lettuce
  leaves with French dressing.

  (3) Ways to use cottage cheese. Cottage cheese alone is an
  appetizing and nutritious dish. It may also be served with
  sweet or sour cream, and some persons add a little sugar,
  or chives, chopped onion or caraway seed.

  The following recipes[154] illustrate a number of ways in
  which cottage cheese may be served:


  Cottage Cheese with Preserves and Jellies

  Pour over cottage cheese any fruit preserves, such as
  strawberries, figs or cherries. Serve with bread or
  crackers. If preferred, cottage cheese balls may be served
  separately and eaten with the preserves. A very attractive
  dish may be made by dropping a bit of jelly into a nest of
  the cottage cheese.


  Cottage Cheese Salad

  Mix thoroughly one pound of cheese, one and one-half
  tablespoonfuls of cream, one tablespoonful of chopped
  parsley and salt to taste. First, fill a rectangular tin
  mold with cold water to chill and wet the surface; line
  the bottom with waxed paper, then pack in three layers of
  the cheese, putting two or three parallel strips of
  pimiento, fresh or canned, between the layers. Cover with
  waxed paper and set in a cool place until ready to serve;
  then run a knife around the sides and invert the mold. Cut
  in slices and serve on lettuce leaves with French dressing
  and wafers or thin bread-and-butter sandwiches. Minced
  olives may be used instead of the parsley, and chopped
  nuts also may be added.


  Cottage Cheese Rolls

  (To be used like meat rolls.)

  A large variety of rolls, suitable for serving as the main
  dish at dinner, may be made by combining legumes (beans of
  various kinds, cowpeas, lentils or peas) with cottage
  cheese, and adding bread crumbs to make the mixture thick
  enough to form into a roll. Beans are usually mashed, but
  peas or small Lima beans may be combined whole with bread
  crumbs and cottage cheese, and enough of the liquor in
  which the vegetables have been cooked should be added to
  get the right consistency; or, instead of beans or peas,
  chopped spinach, beet tops or head lettuce may be added.


  Boston Roast

  1 pound can of kidney beans, or equivalent quantity of cooked beans.
  ½ pound of cottage cheese.
  Bread crumbs.
  Salt.

  Mash the beans or put them through a meat grinder. Add the
  cheese and bread crumbs enough to make the mixture
  sufficiently stiff to be formed into a roll. Bake in a
  moderate oven, basting occasionally with butter or other
  fat, and water. Serve with tomato sauce. This dish may be
  flavored with chopped onions cooked until tender in butter
  or other fat and a very little water.


  Pimiento and Cottage Cheese Roast

  2 cupfuls of cooked Lima beans.
  ¼ pound of cottage cheese.
  Salt.
  3 canned pimientos chopped.
  Bread crumbs.

  Put the first three ingredients through a meat chopper.
  Mix thoroughly and add bread crumbs until it is stiff
  enough to form into a roll. Brown in the oven, basting
  occasionally with butter or other fat, and water.


  Cottage Cheese and Nut Roast

  1 cupful of cottage cheese.
  1 cupful of chopped English walnuts.
  1 cupful of bread crumbs.
  Salt and pepper.
  2 tablespoonfuls of chopped onion.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  Juice of half a lemon.

  Cook the onion in the butter or other fat and a little
  water until tender. Mix the other ingredients and moisten
  with the water in which the onion has been cooked. Pour
  into a shallow baking dish and brown in the oven.


  Cheese Sauce

  (For use with eggs, milk toast or other dishes.)

  One cupful of milk, 1 tablespoonful of cottage cheese, 2
  tablespoonfuls of flour, salt and pepper to taste.

  Thicken the milk with the flour and just before serving
  add the cheese, stirring until it is melted.

  This sauce may be used in preparing creamed eggs or for
  ordinary milk toast. The quantity of cheese in the recipe
  may be increased, making a sauce suitable for using with
  macaroni or rice.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Ont. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1890, pages 237-241.

      Maine Exp. Sta. Rept. 1890, part II, pages 52-57.

      Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1886, pages 119-130.

      Vt. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1890, pages 97-100.

      Vt. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1891, pages 61-74.

      N. Y. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1892, pages 299-392.

      N. Y. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1893, pages 39-162.

      Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1890, pages 115-119.

      Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1907, pages 152-156.

      N. Y. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1891, pages 139-142.

      N. Y. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1894, pages 31-86, 118-121.

      N. J. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1895, pages 136-137.

      Eckles, C. H., and R. H. Shaw. The influence of breed and
      individuality on the composition and properties of milk,
      Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 156, 1913. Eckles, C. H., and R. H.
      Shaw, Variations in the composition and properties of milk
      from the individual cow, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind.
      Bul. 157, 1913.

  [2] Morrow, G. A., and A. G. Manns, Analyses of milk from different
      cows, Ill. Exp. Sta. Bul. 9, 1890.

  [3] Eckles, C. H., and R. H. Shaw, The influence of the stage of
      lactation on the composition and properties of milk, U.
      S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 155, 1913. N. Y. Exp.
      Sta. Rept. 1892, pages 138-140.

  [4] N. Y. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1891, pages 143-162, 316-318.

      Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1890, pages 238-247.

      Van Slyke, L. L., Conditions affecting the proportions
      of fat and protein in cow's milk, Jour. Am. Chem. Soc.,
      30 (1908), no. 7, pages 1166-1186.

  [5] Van Slyke, L. L., and A. W. Bosworth, Composition and
      properties of some casein and paracasein compounds and
      their relations to cheese, N. Y. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul.
      26, 1912.

      Forbes, E. B., and M. H. Keith, A review of the
      literature of phosphorus compounds in animal metabolism,
      Ohio Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 5, pages 32-36, 42-45.

      Van Slyke, L. L., and A. W. Bosworth, Condition of
      casein and salts in milk, N. Y. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 39.

  [6] Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1901, pages 162-166.

  [7] Sammis, J. L., and A. T. Bruhn, The manufacture of cheese
      from pasteurized milk, Wis. Exp. Sta. Research Bul. 27, 1912.

  [8] Baer, U. S., and W. L. Carlyle, Quality of cheese as affected
      by food, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 115, 1904.

  [9] King, F. H., and E. H. Farrington, Milk odor as affected by
      silage, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 59, 1897.

  [10] N. Y. Agricultural Law, 1913, section 30.
       Mich. Agricultural Law, 1915, section 77.
       Wis. Agricultural Law, 1913, section 4601.

  [11] Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1899, pages 13-68.

       Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1903, pages 33-98.

       Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1904, pages 27-88.

       Esten, W. M., and C. J. Mason, Sources of bacteria in
       milk, Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 51, 1908.

       Rogers, L. A., and B. J. Davis, Methods of classifying
       the lactic acid bacteria, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind.
       Bul. 154, 1912.

       Bergey, D. H., The colon-aerogenes group of bacteria,
       Jour. Med. Research, Boston, Vol. XIX, pages 175-200,
       1908.

       Conn, H. W., Classification of dairy bacteria, Conn.
       (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept. 1906.

       Rogers, L. A., Bacteria in milk, U. S. Dept. Agr.,
       Farmers' Bul. 490, 1912.

  [12] Hastings, E. G., Distribution of lactose-fermenting yeasts
       in dairy products, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 23, pages
       107-115.

  [13] Thom, C., and S. H. Ayers, Effect of pasteurization upon
       mold spores, Jour. Agr. Research 6 (1916), no. 4, pages
       153-156.

  [14] Hunziker, O. F., Germicidal action of milk, N. Y. (Cornell)
       Exp. Sta. Bul. 197.

       Stocking, W. A., Germicidal action of milk, Conn.
       (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 37, 1905.

       U. S. Treasury Dept., Hygienic Laboratory, Bul. 41,
       Milk and its relation to the public health, 1908, also
       revised as Bul. 56, 1909.

  [15] U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmers' Bul. 602, Dairy Division,
       Production of clean milk, 1914.

       Lauder, A., and A. Cunningham, Some factors affecting
       the bacteriological content of milk, Edinburgh and East
       of Scotland Coll. of Agr. Rept. XXVIII, 1913.

       Prucha, M. J., and H. M. Weeter, Germ content of milk,
       Ill. Exp. Sta. Bul. 199, 1917.

       Harding, H. A., _et al._, The effect of certain dairy
       operations upon the germ content of milk, N. Y. Exp.
       Sta. Bul. 365, 1913.

       Fraser, W. J., Sources of bacteria in milk, Ill. Exp.
       Sta. Bul. 91, 1903.

       Frandsen, J. H., Care of milk and cream on the farm,
       Neb. Exp. Sta. Bul. 133, 1912.

       Conn, H. W., The care and handling of milk, Conn.
       (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 26, 1903.

       Stocking, W. A., Jr., Quality of milk as affected by
       certain dairy operations, Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul.
       42, 1906.

  [16] Harding, H. A., J. K. Wilson and G. A. Smith, Tests of
       covered milk pails, N. Y. Exp. Sta. Bul. 326, 1910.

       Stocking, W. A., Tests of covered milk pails, Conn.
       (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 48, 1907.

  [17] Wing, L. W., Milking machines; their sterilization and their
       efficiency in producing clean milk, N. Y. (Cornell)
       Exp. Sta. Circ. 18, 1913.

  [18] Ruddick, J. A., and G. H. Barr, The cooling of milk for
       cheese making, Ottawa Dept. of Agr. Bul. 22, 1910.

  [19] Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1895, pages 14-150, Fermentation test
       for gas-producing bacteria in milk. This is commonly
       called the Wisconsin curd test.

  [20] Stevenson, C., Pepsin in cheesemaking, Jour. Agr. (New
       Zeal.) 14 (1917), pages 32-34.

       Todd, A., and E. C. V. Cornish, Experiments in the
       preparation of homemade rennet, Jour. Bd. Agr. (London)
       23 (1916), no. 6, pages 549-555.

       Besana, C., Lack of coagulating ferment in
       cheesemaking, Staz. Sper. Agr. Ital. 49 (1916), pages
       10-12.

       Van Dam, W., Rennet economy and substitutes, Verslag.
       Ver. Exploit. Proefzuivelboerderij. Hoorn, 1914, pages
       45-46.

  [21] The paragraphs on the chemistry of casein and on rennet
       action have been selected from a complete discussion of
       the subject by E. B. Forbes and M. H. Keith in Ohio
       Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 5 entitled, "A review of the
       literature of phosphorus compounds in animal
       metabolism." The original references cited in this
       discussion are given at the end of the chapter in the
       order of their citation in the text.

       See also, Van Slyke, L. L., and D. D. Van Slyke, I, The
       action of dilute acids upon casein when no soluble
       compounds are formed; II, The hydrolyses of the sodium
       salts of casein, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 3,
       pages 75-162, 1906.

       Sammis, J. L., S. K. Suzuki and F. W. Laabs, Factors
       controlling the moisture content of cheese curds, U. S.
       Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 122, pages 1-61, 1910.

  [22] Sammis, J. L., and A. T. Bruhn, The manufacture of Cheddar
       cheese from pasteurized milk, Wis. Exp. Sta. Research
       Bul. 27, 1912.

  [23] Esten, W. M., Bacteria in the dairy, Conn. (Storrs) Rept.
       1896, pages 44-52.

  [24] Bushnell, L. D., and W. R. Wright, Preparation and use of
       butter starter, Mich. Exp. Sta. Bul. 246, 1907.

       Hastings, E. G., Preparation and use of starter, Wis.
       Exp. Sta. Bul. 181, 1909.

       Larsen, C., and W. White, Preparation and use of
       starter, S. D. Exp. Sta. Bul. 123, 1910.

       Guthrie, E. S., and W. W. Fisk, Propagation of starter
       for butter-making and cheese-making, N. Y. (Cornell)
       Exp. Sta. Circ. 13, 1912.

  [25] Sammis, J. L., and A. T. Bruhn, The manufacture of cheese of
       the Cheddar type from pasteurized milk, U. S. Dept.
       Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 165, pages 1-95, 1913.

  [26] Publow, C. A., An apparatus for measuring acidity in
       cheesemaking and buttermaking, Cornell Exp. Sta. Circ.
       7, pages 17-20, 1909.

       Hastings, E. G., and A. C. Evans, A comparison of the
       acid test and the rennet test for determining the
       condition of milk for the Cheddar type of cheese, U. S.
       Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Circ. 210, pages 1-6, 1913.

  [27] Doane, C. F., The influence of lactic acid on the quality of
       cheese of the Cheddar type, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An.
       Ind. Bul. 123, pages 1-20, 1910.

  [28] Fisk, W. W., A study of some factors influencing the yield
       and moisture content of Cheddar cheese, Cornell Exp.
       Sta. Bul. 334, 1913.

  [29] Olson, G. A., Rusty cans and their effect upon milk for
       cheese-making, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 162, pages 1-12,
       1908.

  [30] The term "broken" is included here because the use of some
       curd-breaking tool has always formed a step in certain
       commercially successful processes. In every case in
       which careful experimental work has been done the curd
       knife has been successfully substituted for the
       breaking tool and has reduced the losses of fat and
       casein and in addition aided in obtaining more uniform
       cheese.

  [31] Frandsen, J. H., and T. Thorsen, Farm cheese-making,
       Univ. Neb. Ext. Serv. Bul. 47, pages 1-16, 1917.

       Michels, J., Improved methods for making cottage and
       Neufchâtel cheese, N. C. Exp. Sta. Bul. 210, pages
       29-38.

       Fisk, W. W., Methods of making some of the soft
       cheeses, Cornell Exp. Sta. Circ. 30, pages 41-62, 1915.

  [32] Tolstrup, R. M., Cheese that farmers should make, Iowa
       Agr. 15 (1914), 2, pages 89-90.

  [33] Van Slyke, L. L., and Hart, E. B., Chemical changes in
       the souring of milk and their relations to cottage
       cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 245, pages 1-36,
       1904.

  [34] Sammis, J. L., Three creamery methods for making
       buttermilk cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 239, 1914.

  [35] Matheson, K. J., C. Thom and J. N. Currie, Cheeses of
       the Neufchâtel group, Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 78,
       pages 313-329, 1914.

  [36] Dahlberg, A. O., The manufacture of cottage cheese in
       creameries and milk plants, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bul. 576,
       pages 1-16, 1917.

  [37] Since the number of factories has continued small, the
       manufacture of this type of machine has remained a
       monopoly in which each machine is made to order by the
       Van Eyck Machine Co. of Holland, Mich.

  [38] Presented by Dr. E. C. Schroeder of the U. S. Dept.
       Agr. to the International Association of Dairy and Milk
       Inspectors, at Washington, Oct. 17, 1917, published
       Jour. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc'n 52, N. S. 5, no. 6, pages
       674-685, 1918.

  [39] Matheson, K. J., and F. R. Cammack, How to make cottage
       cheese on the farm, U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmers' Bul.
       850, pages 1-15, 1917.

  [40] Taken from Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 78, page 328.

  [41] Taken from Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 78, page 328.

  [42] Eckles, C. H., and O. Rahn, Die Reifung des Harzkäses,
       Centralb. f. Bakt. etc. 2 abt. 14 (1905), pages
       676-680.

  [43] Monrad, J. H., Hand cheese, N. Y. Produce Rev. etc. 25
       (1908), 16, page 644.

  [44] The authors are under obligations to Mrs. E. E. Kiernan
       for her description of this process (in the _Somerset
       County Leader_, Jan. 10, 1908) and her letters
       concerning it. The statement of the process given here
       combines the published statement with the results of
       our own experiments.

  [45] Monrad, J. H., Appetitost, N. Y. Produce Rev. etc. 25
       (1908), 16, page 644.

  [46] Pouriau, A. F., La Laiterie, sixième ed. par Marcel
       Monteran, page 453, Paris, 1908.

  [47] Among the varietal names for Neufchâtel cheese from
       whole milk or with added cream are Petits Bondons,
       Malakoffs, Carrés affinés. Among low fat or skim forms,
       Petit Suisse, Gournay.

  [48] Thom, C., J. N. Currie and K. J. Matheson, Studies
       relating to the Roquefort and Camembert types of
       cheese, Conn. (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Bul. 79, page 392.

  [49] Full discussion of this product is found in U. S. Dept.
       Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 115. Camembert cheese problems
       in the U. S. also published as Storrs Exp. Sta. Bul. 58
       with the same title. Also a supplementary paper in Bul.
       79 of Storrs Exp. Sta.

  [50] Thom, C., U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Circ. 145
       (1909), page 339.

  [51] Lot record cards for the making and ripening of
       Camembert are given on pages 124 and 125.

  [52] Bosworth, A. W., Chemical studies of Camembert cheese,
       N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 5, pages 23-39,
       1907.

  Dox, A. W., Proteolytic changes in the ripening of Camembert
       cheese, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 109, pages
       1-24, 1908.

  [53] Esten, W. M., and C. J. Mason, Bact. Stud. of Camembert
       cheese, Storrs Exp. Sta. Bul. 83 (1915), pages 103-111.

  [54] See page 134 for domestic or American use of the name
       Brie.

  [55] McNaughton, J., Coulommier cheese, Dept. Agr. Ottawa,
       Canada, Dairy and Cold Storage Ser. Bul. 25, 1910.

  [56] Kosher forms are prepared in compliance with the Mosaic
       law as demanded by the Jewish trade.

  [57] Unpublished analysis of the Storrs Exp. Sta.

  [58] Chapais, J. C., Monographie, Le Fromage Raffiné de L'Isle
       d'Orléans. Quebec, 1911. Published by Ministry of
       Agriculture, pages 1-31.

  [59] The authors acknowledge the assistance of Mr. Louis
       Getman in preparing this description.

  [60] Zumkehr, P., Limburger cheesemaking, Wis. Cheese-makers
       Association, 15th Annual Meeting, 1907, page 62.

  [61] Currie, J. N., Flavor of Roquefort cheese, Jour. Agr.
       Research 2 (1914), no. 1, pages 1-14.

  [62] Wis. Cheese-makers Assoc., 12th Annual Meeting and
       Report, 1906, page xxviii.

  [63] Currie, J. N., The relation of composition to quality
       in cheese, American Food Jour. 11 (1916), no. 9, page
       458. See also Dox on the True Composition of Roquefort
       Cheese, Ztsch. Untersuch. Nahr. u. Genussmtl. 22
       (1911), pages 239-242.

  [64] Thom, C., and Matheson, K. J., Biology of Roquefort
       cheese, Storrs Exp. Sta. Bul. 79, pages 335-347, 1914.

  [65] Currie, J. N., Flavor of Roquefort cheese, Jour. Agr.
       Research, 2 (1914), 1, pages 1-14, Washington.

  [66] Dox, A. W., Die Zusammensetzung des echten
       Roquefort-Käses, in Ztschr. Untersuch. Nahr. u.
       Genussmtl. Bd. 22, Heft. 4, pages 239-242, 1911.

  [67] Marre, E., Le Roquefort, Rodez, 1906. This is the
       authoritative monograph on Roquefort cheese problems.

  [68] Reported on the word of Prof. Fleischmann.

  [69] Thom, C., J. N. Currie and K. J. Matheson, Studies
       relating to the Roquefort and Camembert types of
       cheese, Storrs Exp. Sta. Bul. 79, pages 335-394, 1914.

  [70] Thom, C., U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 82, 1905.

  [71] Thom, C., The salt factor in the mold ripened cheeses,
       Storrs Exp. Sta. Bul. 79, pages 387-394, 1914.

  [72] Thom, C., and Currie, J. N., The dominance of Roquefort
       mold in cheese, Jour. Biol. Chem. 15 (1913), no. 2,
       pages 247-258.

  [73] Currie, J. N., The composition of Roquefort cheese fat,
       Jour. Agr. Research, 2 (1914), 6, pages 429-434.

  [74] Thom, C., Soft cheese studies in Europe, U. S. Dept.
       Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Rept. 22, pages 79-109, 1905.

  [75] Frestadius, A., Nord. Mejeri Tid. 17 (1912), 14, page
       159, Abs. N. Y. Produce Rev. 34 (1912), 2, page 54, and
       Cutting, W. B., The use of baritine in cheese rinds,
       Mo. Commerce and Trade Repts. 1908, 337, page 144, also
       in Practical Dairyman, 2 (1908), 7, page 76.

  [76] Stilton Cheese--J. P. Sheldon--from abs. by New York
       Produce Rev. 28 (June 16, 1909), no. 8, pages 362-363.
       Stilton is said to have originated with Mrs. Paulet,
       Wymondham, Co. of Leicester, and to have been sold by
       her brother--Host of the "Bill" at Stilton from which
       village it derived its name.

  [77] Percival, J., and G. Heather Mason, The microflora of
       Stilton cheese, Jour. Agr. Sci. 5 (1913), part 2, pages
       222-229. See also Thom, C., Soft cheese studies in
       Europe, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Rept. 22 (1905),
       pages 79-109.

  [78] Benson, Miles, in personal letter from analyses of
       cheeses selected for the purpose.

  [79] Dean, H. H., The Creamery Journal, Nov. 1904.

  [80] N. Y. Produce Rev. etc., Vol. 32, no. 14, page 536.

  [81] N. Y. Produce Rev. etc., Vol. 30, no. 5, page 188; Vol.
       30, no. 14, page 534; Vol. 31, no. 5, page 182.

       Marty, G., Brick cheesemaking, Wis. Cheese-makers
       Assoc., 15th Annual Meeting, 1907, page 66.

       Wuethrich, F., The manufacture of Brick cheese, Wis.
       Cheese-makers Assoc., 14th Annual Meeting, 1906, page
       50.

       Schenk, C., Brick cheesemaking, Wis. Cheese-makers
       Assoc., 13th Annual Meeting, 1905, page 38.

  [82] Doane, C. F., and H. W. Lawson, Varieties of cheese,
       descriptions and analysis, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. of An.
       Ind. Bul. 146, 1911.

  [83] Ligeon, X., Herstellung des Port Salut Käses, Milchztg.
       38 (1909), no. 39, pages 459-460.

  [84] These paragraphs were taken from N. Y. Exp. Sta. Bul.
       56, Experiments in the manufacture of cheese; Part I.
       The manufacture of Edam cheese, 1893. See also,
       Haecker, T. L., Experiments in the manufacture of
       cheese, Minn. Exp. Sta. Bul. 35, 1894.

  [85] Boekhout, F. W. J., and J. J. O. de Vries, Cracking of
       Edam, Verslag. Landbouwk. Onderzoek.
       Rykslandboupoefstat. (Netherlands), 20 (1917), pages
       71-78, fig. 1.

       Boekhout, F. W. F., and J. J. O. de Vries, Sur le
       défaut "Knijpers" dans le fromage d'Edam, Rev. Gen.
       Lait, 9 (1913), no. 18, pages 420-427.

  [86] Paragraphs taken from N. Y. Exp. Sta. Bul. 56,
       Experiments in the manufacture of cheese; Part II. The
       manufacture of Gouda cheese, 1893. See also, Hayward,
       H., Method of making Gouda cheese, Pa. Exp. Sta. Rept.
       1890, pages 79-81, and Haecker, T. L., Experiments in
       the manufacture of cheese, Minn. Exp. Sta. Bul. 35,
       1894, and Monrad, J. H., in N. Y. Produce Rev. 25
       (1907), no. 8, page 336, where a home process of making
       this cheese is given.

  [87] The authors acknowledge here the helpful suggestions
       and criticisms of G. C. Dutton, New York State Cheese
       Instructor.

  [88] Russell, H. L., Cheese as affected by gas-producing
       bacteria, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1895, pages 139-146.

       Marshall, C. E., Gassy curd and cheese, Mich. Exp. Sta.
       Bul. 183, 1900.

  [89] S. M. Babcock, Hot iron test of cheese curd, Wis. Exp.
       Sta. Rept. 1895, pages 133-134.

  [90] Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, A study of some of
       the salts formed by casein and paracasein with acids,
       their relation to American Cheddar cheese, N. Y.
       (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 214, 1902.

  [91] Decker, J. W., Cheesemaking from sour milk, Wis. Exp.
       Sta. Rept. 1898, pages 42-44.

  [92] Russell, H. L., Cheese as affected by gas producing
       bacteria, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1895, pages 139-146.

       Marshall, C. E., Gassy curd and cheese, Mich. Exp. Sta.
       Bul. 183, 1900.

       Moore, V. A., and A. R. Ward, Causes of tainted cheese
       curds, N. Y. (Cornell) Exp. Sta. Bul. 158, 1899.

  [93] Van Slyke, L. L., Investigations relating to the
       manufacture of cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul.
       68, 1894.

  [94] Van Slyke, L. L., Investigations relating to the
       manufacture of cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul.
       62, 1893.

  [95] Van Slyke, L. L., Methods of paying for milk at cheese
       factories, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 308, 1908.

  [96] Farm Bur. Exchange, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y., Vol. 1,
       no. 9, 1915. Cooling milk before delivery at the cheese
       factory.

  [97] Sammis, J. L., et al., Factors controlling the moisture
       content of cheese curds, Wis. Exp. Sta. Research Bul.
       7, 1910.

       Ont. Agr. College and Exp. Farm Rept. 1909, pages
       111-124, Cheese making experiments.

       Ont. Agr. College and Exp. Farm Rept. 1910, pages
       111-128, Cheese making experiments.

       Fisk, W. W., A study of some factors influencing the
       yield and the moisture content of Cheddar cheese,
       Cornell Exp. Sta. Bul. 334, pages 515-537, 1913.

  [98] Sammis, J. L., and A. T. Bruhn, The manufacture of
       cheese of the Cheddar type from pasteurized milk, U. S.
       Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 165, pages 1-95, 1913.

  [99] New York Prod. Review, Vol. 34, no. 2, page 66.

  [100] Babcock, S. M., _et al._, Cheese ripening as
       influenced by sugar, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1901, pages
       162-167.

       E. G. Hastings, _et al._, Studies on the factors
       concerned in the ripening of Cheddar cheese, Wis. Exp.
       Sta. Research Bul. 25.

  [101] Fisk, W. W., Skim-milk Cheddar cheese, N. Y. (Cornell)
        Exp. Sta. Ex. Bul. 18, 1917.

  [102] Curd was spilled but practically all recovered.

  [103] Suzuki, S. K., _et al._, Production of fatty acids and
        esters in Cheddar cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Research Bul.
        11.

  [104] Babcock, S. M., _et al._, Cheese ripening as
        influenced by sugar, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1901, pages
        162-167.

  [105] Bosworth, A. W., and M. J. Prucha, Fermentation of
        citric acid in milk, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech.
        Bul. 14, 1910.

        Van Slyke, L. L., and A. W. Bosworth, Condition of
        casein and salts in milk, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta.
        Tech. Bul. 39, 1914.

        Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, A study of some of
        the salts formed by casein and paracasein with acids;
        their relation to American Cheddar cheese, N. Y.
        (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 214, 1902.

        Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, Some of the
        relations of casein and paracasein to bases and acids
        and their application to Cheddar cheese, N. Y.
        (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 261, 1905.

        Van Slyke, L. L., and O. B. Winter, Cheese ripening
        investigations, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul.
        33, 1914.

  [106] Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, The relation of
        carbon dioxide to proteolysis in the ripening of
        Cheddar cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 231,
        1903.

  [107] Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, Some of the
        compounds present in American Cheddar cheese, N. Y.
        (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 219, 1902.

  [108] Van Slyke, L. L., _et al._, Action of rennin or
        casein, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul. 31, 1913.

        Van Slyke, L. L., _et al._, Cheese ripening
        investigations; rennet enzyme as a factor in cheese
        ripening, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 233, 1903.

  [109] Bosworth, A. W., Studies relating to the chemistry of
        milk and casein, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul.
        37, 1914.

  [110] Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1898, Distribution of galactase
        in milk from different sources, pages 87-97.

        Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1903, pages 195-197, 201-205,
        222-223, Action of proteolytic ferments on milk.

  [111] Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept. 1900, pages 102-122.

  [112] Harding, H. A., and M. J. Prucha, The bacterial flora
        of Cheddar cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Tech. Bul.
        8.

  [113] Bacterium, Bacillus and Lactobacillus are preferred by
        different authors as generic placing of the Bulgarian
        sour milk species.

  [114] Hastings, E. G., Alice C. Evans and E. B. Hart, The
        bacteriology of Cheddar cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul.
        150, pages 1-52, 1912.

  [115] Harding, H. A., The rôle of the lactic acid bacteria
        in the manufacture and in the early stages of ripening
        of Cheddar cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 237,
        1903.

  [116] Heinemann, P. G., The kinds of lactic acid produced by
        lactic acid bacteria, Jour. Biol. Chem., Vol. 2, pages
        603-608.

  [117] Hastings, E. G., _et al._, The bacteriology of Cheddar
        cheese, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 150, 1912.

  [118] Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, Conditions affecting
        chemical changes in cheese ripening, N. Y. (Geneva)
        Exp. Sta. Bul. 236, 1903.

  [119] Van Slyke, L. L., _et al._, Cheese ripening at low
        temperatures, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 234, 1903.

  [120] Van Slyke, L. L., _et al._, Cheese ripening at low
        temperatures, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 234, 1903.

  [121] Doane, C. F., Methods and results of paraffining
        cheese, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Circ. 181,
        pages 1-16, 1911.

  [122] Doane, C. F., and E. E. Eldredge, The use of Bacillus
        Bulgaricus in starters for making Swiss or Emmenthal
        cheese, Dept. of Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 148, 1915.

  [123] N. Y. Produce Rev. and Am. Creamery, Vol. 37, no. 25,
        page 1112, Starter for Swiss cheese.

  [124] Clark, W. M., On the formation of "eyes" in Emmenthal
        cheese, Jour. Dairy Sci. 1 (1917), no. 2, pages
        91-113.

        Among important studies of Swiss cheese ripening are
        the following: Freudenreich, E. v., and Orla Jensen,
        Ueber die in Emmentalerkäse stattfindende
        Proprionsäuregärung, Centralb. f. Bakt. etc. 2 Abt.
        17, page 529.

        Jensen, Orla, Biologische Studien über den
        Käsereifungs-prozess unter spezieller Berucksichtigung
        der flüchtigen Fettsäuren, Centralb. f. Bakt. etc. 2
        Abt. 13 (1904), page 161.

        Eldredge, E. E., and L. A. Rogers, The bacteriology of
        cheese of the Emmenthal type, Centralb. f. Bakt. 2
        Abt. 40 (1914), no. 1/8, pages 5-21.

  [125] Gorini, C., Studi sulla fabricatione razionale del
        fromaggi Grana, Boll. uff. del Ministero Agr. Ind. e
        Comm. Anno X, serie C, Fasc. 10, pages 1-7, Roma,
        1911.

        Gorini, C., On the distribution of bacteria in Grana
        cheese, Centralb. f. Bakt. etc. 2 Abt. 12 (1904),
        pages 78-81.

        Fascetti, G., The technological chemistry of the
        manufacture of Grana cheese in Reggio, Staz. Sper.
        Agr. Ital. 47 (1914), no. 8, pages 541-568.

  [126] Cornalba, G., Caciocavallo in Lombardy, L'Industria
        del Latte 3, page 105, Abs. in Jahresb. f. Tierchemie
        36 (1906), page 250.

  [127] Babcock, S. M., Albumin cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Rept.
        12 (1895), page 134.

  [128] Doane, C. F., Whey butter, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An.
        Ind. Circ. 161, pages 1-7, 1910.

        Sammis, J. L., Making whey butter at Cheddar cheese
        factories, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 246, 1915.

        Ellenberrger, H. B., and M. R. Tolstrup, Skimming whey
        at Vermont cheese factories, Vt. Dept. Agr. Bul. 26,
        1916.

  [129] Farrington, E. H., and G. J. Davis, The disposal of
        creamery sewage, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 245, 1915.

  [130] Dotterrer, W. D., and R. S. Breed, Why and how
        pasteurize dairy by-products, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta.
        Bul. 412, 1915.

  [131] Harding, H. A., and G. A. Smith, Control of rust spots
        in cheese, N. Y. (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Bul. 225, 1902.

  [132] Elliott, W. J., Creameries and cheese factories, Mont.
        Exp. Sta. Bul. 53, 1904.

        Farrington, E. H., and E. H. Benkendorf, Origination
        and construction of cheese factories and creameries,
        Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 244, 1915.

  [133] From N. Y. price current.

  [134] Hart, E. B., A simple test for casein in milk and its
        relation to the dairy industry, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul.
        156, pages 1-22, 1907.

  [135] Sammis, J. L., The moisture test in the cheese
        factory, Wis. Exp. Sta. Circ. 81, 1917.

        Troy, H. C., A cheese moisture test, N. Y. (Cornell)
        Exp. Sta. Ext. Bul. 17, 1917.

  [136] Sammis, J. L., Correct payment for cheese factory milk
        by the Babcock test, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 276, 1917.

  [137] Dairy Laws of Wisconsin, 1916, section 4607a.

  [138] Sammis, J. L., The improved system of selling cheese,
        Hoard's Dairyman 52 (1916), 15, pages 5, 11-12.

        Hibbard, B. H., and A. Hobson, Markets and prices of
        Wisconsin cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 251, pages 1-56,
        1915.

  [139] Hibbard, B. H., and Asher Hobson, Markets and prices
        of Wisconsin cheese, Wis. Exp. Sta. Bul. 251, 1915.

  [140] N. Y. Agricultural Laws, Sect. 3, paragraphs 48 and
        49.

  [141] Langworthy, C. F., and C. L. Hunt, Cheese and its
        economical uses in the diet, U. S. Dept. Agr. Farmers'
        Bul. 487, 1912.

  [142] See also, Reich, R., Cheese as a food and its judgment
        from standpoint of the food chemist, Arch. f. Hyg. 80
        (1913), no. 1/6, pages 169-195.

  [143] This calculation was added by the authors.

  [144] Varietal name added by authors.

  [145] Doane, C. F., and H. W. Lawson, Varieties of cheese,
        U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 146.

  [146] U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind., Dairy Div. A. I. 21,
        1917.

  [147] Doane, C. F., _et al._, The digestibility of cheese,
        U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Circ. 166, pages 1-21,
        1911.

  [148] Langworthy and Hunt, _loc. cit._

  [149] U. S. Dept. Agr. Farmers' Bul. 487, page 38.

  [150] Levin, W., Cheese poisoning--a toxicogenic bacillus
        isolated from cheese, Jour. Lab. Clin. Med. 2 (1917),
        page 761.

  [151] Thom, C., Camembert cheese problems in the United
        States, U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. An. Ind. Bul. 115.

  [152] Langworthy and Hunt, _loc. cit._

  [153] Langworthy and Hunt, _loc. cit._

  [154] U.S. Dept. of Agr. Bur. An. Ind. A. I. 18.




  INDEX


  Acetic acid in cheese, 247.

  Acid cocci, 19.

  Acid fermentation, 17.

  Acid organisms, 41.

  Acid peptonizing organisms, 41.

  Acidity,
    in cheese and curd, 57, 58, 59.
    and color, 67.
    and rennet action, 66.
    and ripening, 255.
    and separation of whey, 66.
    and texture, 67.
    control of, 64.
    in milk, 60.
    testing, 60, 61.

  Acidy cheese, 66.

  Acme curd rake, 196.

  Albumin, 10.

  Albumin cheese, 295.

  Alcohols in cheese, 248.

  Alkaline bacteria, 20.

  Appetitost, 114.

  Ash of milk, 11.

  Ayers, S. H. (Thom and), 21.


  Babcock, S. M., 201, 237, 248, 295.

  Babcock test, 327-332.

  Bacillus botulinus, 370.
    bulgaricus = Bacterium bulgaricum, 18, 279.
    enteritidis, 370.
    subtilis, 20.

  Bäckstein cheese, 164.

  Bacteria, 14.
    alkali-producing, 20.
    control of, 25.
    from the air, 23.
    from the cow, 23.
    from the milker, 24.
    from the utensils, 24.
    groups of, in milk, 15.
    in Cheddar ripening, 252-254.
    inert type, 20.
    influence on yield of Cheddar, 227.
    peptonizing, 20.
    sources in milk, 22.

  Bacterium bulgaricum, 18, 19.
    aerogenes, 18.
    casei, 253.
    coli-communis, 18, 252.
    guntheri, 41.
    lactis acidi, 18, 41, 252, 254.
    lactis aerogenes, 252.
    liquefaciens, 20.
    prodigiosus, 20.

  Baer, U. S., and W. L. Carlyle, 12.

  Baker's cheese, 105.

  Bang, Ivar, 39.

  Bang's theory of casein, 37.

  Barite, baryta, 159.

  Barnard curd mill, 208.

  Benson, Miles, 163.

  Bergey, D. H., 16.

  Besana, C., 29.

  Block Swiss, 285.

  Blue label, 109.

  Blue-veined cheeses, 150.

  Board of Health lactometer, 336.

  Boards of Trade (Cheese), 349, 350.

  Boekhout, J. W. J., and J. J. Ott de Vries, 174.

  Bondon cheese, 94.

  Bosworth, Alfred W., 37-38, 40, 126, 251.

  Bosworth, A. W., and M. J. Prucha, 249.

  Bosworth, A. W., and L. L. Van Slyke, 40.

  Bosworth's theory of casein, 37.

  Branding cheese, 360.

  Breeds of cows, milk from, 6.

  Brick cheese, 86, 136, 164 to 169, 358.
    making, 165.
    qualities, 167.
    ripening, 167.
    score-card, 169.
    yield, 169.

  Brie,
    American, 134-136.
    French, 117, 131, 132.

  Brindse, Brinse cheese, 110.

  Bushnell, L. D., and W. R. Wright, 44.

  Buttermilk cheese, 93.

  Butyric acid in Cheddar cheese, 248.

  Butyric organisms, 21.

  Buying milk, 343.


  Caciocavallo cheese, 293.

  California Jack cheese, 233.

  Calorimeter values, 364.

  Camembert cheese, 86, 111, 117 to 131, 137.
    acidity in, 122.
    bacteria in, 127.
    composition, 128.
    described, 117.
    domestic, 360.
    factory, 129.
    group, 117.
    lot-card, 124, 125.
    making, 118-122.
    ripening, 123.

  Caproic acid in cheese, 136.

  Carrés affinés, 114.

  Casein, defined chemically, 33.
    acted on by acid, 33.
    in cheese ripening, 249.
    in milk and cheese, 9.
    Robertson's theory, 34.
    test (Hart), 334.

  Caseinogen, 35.

  Catalase, 11.

  Chapais, J. C., 137.

  Cheddar cheese, 79, 86, 173, 184 to 275, 358, 368.
    acidity test for, 190.
    acidy, 266, 270.
    American, 230.
    body in, 271, 273.
    boxes for, 264.
    calorimeter studies of, 368.
    cheddaring curd for, 204-207.
    color in, 270.
    composition of, 223.
    cooking curd for, 195-200.
    corky, 199.
    cutting curd for, 193.
    defects in, 265.
    drawing whey, 200.
    dressing, 216.
    dry body in, 267.
    English, 173.
    feedy flavors in, 265.
    finish in, 271.
    firming curd for, 201-204.
    flavor of, 221.
    food value of, 362-365.
    fruity flavors in, 266.
    gas in curd for, 219.
    gas in milk for, 217, 219, 269.
    gassy, 268.
    hooping curd for, 212.
    hot-iron test for, 201, 208.
    judging, 271.
    losses in, 262, 263.
    lot-card for, 184, 187.
    matting, 204.
    milk for, 186.
    milling, 207.
    moisture content of, 228, 258.
    mottled, 221, 270.
    packing curd for, 202.
    paraffining, 263.
    pin-holes in, 189.
    pressing, 213.
    quality in, 221, 272-273.
    ripening milk for, 189 to 192.
    ripening of, 247 to 263.
    salting curd for, 211.
    score-card for, 271, 273, 275.
    seamy color in, 214, 221.
    setting, 192.
    shipping, 264.
    starter for, 190, 191.
    sweet flavor in, 266.
    texture of, 267.
    variations of process, 229.
    yield, 224, 225.

  Cheese, and health, 369.
    and meals, 367.
    and price of, 373.
    boxes, 357.
    canned, 372.
    care in home, 372.
    choice of, 370-371.
    classification of, 81-85.
    color, 56.
    composition-table, 86, 364.
    definition of, 1.
    digestibility of, 368.
    fondue, 375.
    food value of, 362-367.
    fuel value of, 365.
    history of, 4.
    in dietaries, 370-374.
    in the household, 361-381,
    knife, 205.
    names, 81.
    poisoning, 370.
    price, 323, 357.
    problems, 3.
    processed, 84.
    ripening (_see varietal descriptions_).
    roast, 380.
    salad, 378, 379.
    sandwich, 371, 378.
    sauce, 374, 381.
    soufflé, 376.
    total consumption of, 362.
    trier, 272.
    varieties, 3.
    with sour-milk flavor, 89.
    yield basis for buying milk, 343.

  Cheese-making,
    an art, 2.
    a science, 3.

  Chemistry of rennet action, 33-40.

  Cheshire, 184.

  Clabber cheese, 90.

  Clark, W. M., 284.

  Classification of cheese, 81 to 85.

  Club cheese, 85, 231.

  Cold-storage, 356, 361.

  Colon-aërogenes group, 18.

  Color, 56.

  Colostrum, 18.

  Commercial starter, 43.

  Composition of Brick, 169.
    Camembert, 128.
    Cheddar, 223.
    Cottage, 92.
    Cream, 108.
    Limburger, 147.
    Neufchâtel, 105, 107.
    Roquefort, 151.
    Swiss, 287.

  Conn, H. W., 16, 23, 152.

  Connecticut (Storrs) Exp. Sta. Rept., 7, 16.

  Constituents of milk, 7.

  Cooking curd, 77.
    for Cheddar, 195.
    for Swiss, 281.

  Coöperative organizations, 309.

  Cornalba, G., 293.

  Cottage cheese, 2, 86, 368, 379-381.
    discussed, 90-93.

  Coulommiers cheese, 111, 117, 131, 132.

  Cow-brand cheese, 109.

  Cream cheese, 108.

  Curd, 9.
    breaking, 75.
    chemistry of, 33 to 40.
    cooking of, 77.
    cutting, 75.
    draining, 79.
    fork, 210.
    knives, 77 (Fig. 11), 194, 195.

  Curdling period, 74.

  Curd-making, 55.
    factors in, 55.

  Curd mills, 207 to 209.

  Curd pail, 213.

  Curd rakes, 196.

  Curd scoop, 213.

  Curd sink, 204.

  Curd test, 26.

  Currie, James N., 149, 150, 155, 156.

  Cutting, W. B., 159.

  Cutting curd, 75-77.
    for Brick, 165.
    for Cheddar, 193-195.
    for Edam, 175.
    for Isigny, 135.
    for Limburger, 141.
    for Roquefort, 154.
    for Swiss, 280-281.


  Dahlberg, Arnold O., 98.

  Daisies (cheese), 230.

  Danish cheese, 173.

  Davis, B. J. (and L. A. Rogers), 16.

  Dean, H. H., 163.

  Decker, John W., 217.

  Derbyshire, 184.

  Diastase, 11.

  Digestibility of cheese, 367.

  Diseased cows, effect on milk, 13.

  Doane, C. F., 64, 263, 296.

  Doane, C. F., and E. E. Eldredge, 279.

  Doane, C. F., and H. W. Lawson, 169, 365.

  Dotterrer, W. D., and R. S. Breed, 301.

  Dox, Arthur W., 126, 150.

  Draining, 79.
    Camembert, 121-122.
    Cheddar, 195-206.
    Cottage, 91.
    Limburger, 142.
    Neufchâtel, 97.
    Roquefort, 154.
    Swiss, 280-282.

  Draining cloths,
    for Jack cheese, 235.
    for Neufchâtel, 97.
    for Swiss, 282.

  Draining rack for Neufchâtel, 97.

  Dressing Cheddar, 216.

  Dry body, 267.

  Duclaux, E., 39, 33-40.

  Duclaux's theory of casein, 36.

  Dutch cheeses, 173.

  Dutton, G. C., 184.


  Eagle brand, 109.

  Eckles, C. H., and Otto Rahn, 112.

  Eckles, C. H., and R. H. Shaw, 7.

  Edam cheese, 173, 174 to 180, 366.

  Eldredge, E. E., and L. A. Rogers, 284.

  Ellenberger, H. B., and M. R. Tolstrup, 296.

  Elliott, W. J., 310.

  Emmenthal or Emmenthaler, 276

  English dairy cheese, 238.

  Enzymes,
    in cheese-ripening, 250.
    in milk, 11.

  Equipment list for Cheddar factory, 307.

  Esten, W. M., 41.

  Esten, W. M., and C. J. Mason, 16, 129.

  Esters in Cheddar cheese, 248, 254.

  Export Cheddar, 230.

  Exportation of cheese, 321.


  Factory, 297-309.
    arrangement, 302-306.
    boiler-room in, 301.
    building, 299.
    cleanliness in, 307.
    coöperative, 308.
    curing-rooms, 300.
    drainage, 298.
    equipment list, 307.
    heating, 300.
    location of, 298, 299.
    organization, 308-309.
    proprietary, 308.
    supplies, list for, 307.
    system, 313, 320.
    ventilation of, 300.
    water in, 298.

  Farm cheese, 133.

  Farrington, E. H., and G. H. Benkendorf, 310.

  Farrington, E. H., and G. J. Davis, 298.

  Farrington, Harvey, 314.

  Farrington's test, 62.

  Fascetti, G., 288.

  Fat-basis for buying milk, 344.

  Fat and casein ratio, 224, 226.

  Fat and cheese yield, 225, 226.

  Fat and water content, 86.

  Fat in cheese-ripening, 86.

  Fat in milk, 8.

  Fat loss, 226-227.
    plus two method, 345.

  Fat test, 327-334.

  Feeds, 11.

  Fermentation, 15.

  Fermentation test, 26.

  Ferments, 15, 29.

  Filled cheese, 315, 361.

  Fisk, Walter W., 68, 89, 228.

  "Flats," 230.

  Flavor of cheese, 368, 371.

  Flavor of feeds, 11.

  Fleischmann, W., 152.

  Food value of cheese, 362-367.

  Forbes, E. B., and M. H. Keith, 9, 33 to 40.

  Formic acid in Cheddar, 248.

  Frandsen, J. H., 23, 89.

  Frandsen, J. H., and T. Thorsen, 89.

  Fraser, W. J., 23.

  Fraser hoop, 212.

  Frestadius, A., 159.

  Freudenreich, E. von, and Orla Jensen, 284.

  Full skim Cheddar, 242.


  Galactase, 11.

  Gang press, 214.

  Gases in cheese-ripening, 249.

  Gassy curd, 146, 220.

  Gassy milk, 219.

  Geographical distribution of cheese factories, 315.

  Germicidal effect of milk, 22.

  Gervais cheese, 109.

  Getman, Louis, 139.

  Gex cheese, 164.

  Glaesler (Swiss), 286.

  Glymol, 334.

  Goat cheese, 109.

  Gorgonzola cheese, 158 to 161.

  Gorini, Constantine, 288.

  Gosselin curd mill, 208.

  Gouda cheese, 173, 180 to 183.

  Gournay cheese, 114.

  Grana cheese, 288.

  Granular curd cheese, 232.

  "Green" cheese, 247.

  Gruyère, 276.

  Guthrie, E. S., and W. W. Fisk, 44.


  Haecker, T. L., 180.

  Half-skim Cheddar, 243.

  Hall, W. W., 187.

  Halliburton, 35.

  Hammarsten, Olof, 39, 33-40.

  Hammarsten's theory of rennet action, 35.

  Hand cheese, 112.

  Hard cheese, 172.

  Harding, H. A., 23, 254.

  Harding, H. A., and M. J. Prucha, 252.

  Harding, H. A., J. K. Wilson, and G. A. Smith, 25.

  Harding, H. A., and G. A. Smith, 306.

  Harris curd mill, 209.

  Hart, E. B., 38, 40, 91, 201, 249, 253, 255, 256, 334.

  Hart casein test, 334.

  Harz cheese, 112.

  Hastings, E. G., 21, 44, 237.

  Hastings, E. G., and Alice C. Evans, 60.

  Hastings, E. G., Alice C. Evans, and E. B. Hart, 253, 255.

  Hayward, H., 180.

  Heat in cheese-making, 77-78, 87, 91, 195, 281.

  Heinemann, P. G., 254.

  Hibbard, B. H., and A. Hobson, 349, 358-359.

  History of cheese-making, 4, 311.

  Hoops, for Camembert, 121.
    for Cheddar, 212.
    for Roquefort, 154.
    for Swiss, 278.

  Hosl, J., 39.

  Hot-iron test, 201.

  Household, cheese in, 362-381.

  Hunziker, O. F., 22.

  Hydrogen in Cheddar, 254.


  Importation of cheese, 321.

  Inert bacteria, 20.

  Iowa Exp. Sta. Bull., 310.

  d'Isigny cheese, 132, 134-137.

  Italian cheeses, 288-291.


  Jack cheese, 184, 233-236.

  Jensen, Orla, 284.

  Junker curd mill, 209.


  Kascoval cheese, 164.

  Kiernan, Mrs. E. E., 113.

  Kikkoji, 36, 39.

  King, F. H., and E. H. Farrington, 12.

  Kosher cheese, 136.


  Lactic starter, 41-54.

  Lactometer, 335.
    Board of Health type, 336.
    Quevenne type, 335.

  Lactose (_see_ Milk-sugar), 10.

  Langworthy, C. F., and C. L. Hunt, 363, 372.

  Larsen, C., and W. White, 44.

  Lauder, A., and A. Cunningham, 22.

  Laws about cheese, 359-361.

  Laws about milk, 347.

  Leicestershire, 184.

  Levin, W., 370.

  Leyden cheese, 238.

  License for cheese-maker, 361.

  Liederkrauz cheese, 134, 138.

  Ligeon, X., 170.

  Limburger, 86, 136, 139 to 147, 358, 371.
    factory, 139-140.
    making process, 140-143.
    qualities, 145.
    ripening, 143-145.
    wrapping, 145.
    yield of, 147.

  Lindet, L., 38, 39.

  Lipase, 11.

  Livarot cheese, 135.

  Loevenhart, A. S., 36, 39.

  Long-horn (Cheddar) cheese, 230.

  Lot-card, for Camembert, 124-125.
    for Cheddar, 184, 187.
    for starter, 53.


  Macaroni and cheese, 377.

  Maine Exp. Sta. Rept., 7.

  Malakoff cheese, 94, 114.

  Manns, A. G., 7.

  Manns test, 231.

  Manufacturer's brand, 360-361.

  Marketing, 343-361.
    laws concerning, 360.

  Marre, E., 151.

  Marschall test, 62.

  Marshall, C. E., 189, 217.

  Marty, G., 165.

  Matheson, K. J., F. R. Cammack, 100.

  Matheson, K. J., C. Thom, and J. N. Currie, 94.

  Matting, 204.

  Mayo, N. F., and C. G. Elling, 289.

  Mazé, P., 116.

  McAdam, Robert, 314.

  McNaughton, Janet, 132.

  McPherson curd agitator, 196.

  Mercantile exchanges, 351.

  Michels, John, 89.

  Michigan Agr. Law, 13.

  Milk, acid fermentation of, 17.
    acidity in, 60.
    albumin, 10.
    ash, 11.
    bacteria in, 21.
    bacterial contamination of, 21.
    buying, 343.
    casein in, 9, 224.
    clean, 22.
    colostrum in, 13.
    composition of, 5, 6, 56, 222.
    constituents, 7.
    defined, 5.
    enzymes in, 11.
    fat in, 8, 224.
    flavors in, 11.
    from diseased cows, 13.
    germicidal property, 22.
    lactose in, 10.
    moisture in, 8.
    odors in, 12.
    paying for, 343.
    quality in, 5.
    sugar (lactose), 10.
    variation in composition, 6.

  Milking machines, 25.

  Milk-sugar, 10.

  Moisture and acidity, 70.

  Moisture control, 68, 69.

  Moisture limits in cheese, 358.

  Moisture test (Troy's), 337-342.

  Molding machines for Neufchâtel, 98.

  Molding Neufchâtel, 104.

  Molds,
    in Cheddar, 271.
    in milk, 21.

  Monrad, J. H., 112, 114, 180.

  Moore, V. A., and A. R. Ward, 217.

  Morrow, G. A., and A. G. Manns, 7.

  Mottled Cheddar, 221, 270.

  Mucors, 93.

  Münster, 147, 148, 366.

  Mysost, 293, 295.


  Natural starter, 43.

  Neufchâtel, 80, 85, 86, 89, 371.
    American, 95.
    domestic, 95, 106.
    factory, 95.
    group discussed, 94 to 109.
    packages, 98.
    ripened form, 114-116, 117.
    yield, 107.

  New Jersey Exp. Sta. Rept., 7.

  New York (Geneva) Exp. Sta. Rept., 7, 8, 174.

  New York Mercantile Exchange, 351-356.

  New York Price Current, 315, 351.

  New York Produce Review, 165, 233, 280.

  New York State Department of Agriculture, 13.

  Niszler (Swiss) cheese, 286.

  Nut cheese, 109.


  Odors absorbed by milk, 12.

  Oidium (Oospora) lactis, 113, 116, 131, 136, 163.

  Oka cheese, 169.

  Olimento cheese, 109.

  Olive cheese, 109.

  Olson, G. A., 74.

  Ontario Agricultural College Bulletins, 7, 228.

  Over-ripe milk, 218.


  Pails, 24, 25.

  Paracasein, 35, 250.

  Paraffining Cheddar, 263.

  Parmesan cheese, 2, 80, 86, 173, 288-291.

  Pasteurization, 11, 26, 45, 229, 396.

  Pasteurized Cheddar, 229.

  Pasty body, 270.

  Paying for milk, 343-346.

  Penicillium brevicaule, 129.
    camemberti, 116, 126, 127, 131.
    camemberti var. rogeri, 116.
    candidum, 116.
    roqueforti, 155, 156, 159, 163.

  Pennsylvania pot cheese, 113.

  Pepsin, 30, 33.

  Peptonizing bacteria, 20.

  Percival, J., and G. Heather Mason, 163.

  Perishable varieties, 356.

  Peroxidase, 11.

  Petit Carré, 94, 114.

  Petite Suisse, 94, 114.

  Petits Bondons, 114.

  Petry, E., 36, 39.

  Philadelphia cream, 109, 360.

  Picnic cheese, 230.

  Pimiento cheese, 85, 101.

  Pimientos in Cheddar, 238.

  Pim-olive cheese, 109.

  Pineapple cheese, 184, 238.

  Pohl curd mill, 208.

  Poisoning by cheese, 370.

  Pont l'Eveque cheese, 135.

  Pooling method, 345.

  Port du Salut cheese, 136, 169 to 171.

  Pot cheese, 113.

  Pouriau, A. F., 82, 114.

  Press cloths, 212.

  Presses, 214, 215.

  Prices,
    distribution of, 357-359.
    yearly average of, 323.

  Primost, 295.

  Processed cheese, 84.

  Propionic acid in cheese, 247, 248.

  Provolono, 294.

  Prucha, M. J., and H. M. Weeter, 23.

  Ptyalin, 30.

  Publow, C. A., 60.

  Publow's test, 62.

  Pure culture starter, 43.


  Quality,
    in Cheddar, 272-273.
    in Edam, 180.
    in Limburger, 145.
    in milk, 6.
    in Swiss, 286.

  Quevenne lactometer, 335.


  Rabbit cheese, 372.

  Raffiné cheese, 137, 138.

  Recipes for cooking cheese, 375-381.

  Reductase, 11.

  Regianito cheese, 292.

  Reich, R., 363.

  Rennet, 9, 30, 312.
    action, 33 to 40.
    action, chemistry of, 33
    action delayed by, 73.
    adding, 72.
    amount to use, 72.
    extract, 31, 279.
    for Camembert, 121.
    for Cheddar, 192.
    for Limburger, 141.
    for Neufchâtel, 100.
    for Roquefort, 153.
    for Swiss, 279.
    in ripening Cheddar, 250.
    strength of, 72.
    temperature of using, 71.
    test, 62.

  Rennin, 30.

  Rice and cheese, 377.

  Ricotte, 11, 295.

  Robbiola, 117.

  Robertson, T. Brailsford, 38.

  Robertson's theory of casein, 34.

  Roger, Georges, 116.

  Rogers, L. A., 16.

  Rogers, L. A., and B. J. Davis, 16.

  Roquefort cheese, 2, 86, 150, 158, 368, 369, 371.
    acidity for, 153.
    caves for, 151.
    composition of, 151.
    curdling for, 153.
    cutting curd for, 154.
    draining, 154.
    from cow's milk, 152.
    milk for, 153.
    mold for, 154.
    ripening of, 156-157.
    salting, 155.
    setting, 153.
    temperature, 153.

  Ruddick, J. A., and G. H. Baur, 26.

  Russell, H. L., 189, 217.

  Rusty spots, 74, 306.


  Sage cheese, 239-241.

  Salt in Cheddar ripening, 259.

  Salting,
    Camembert, 122.
    Cheddar, 211.
    Limburger, 142.
    Neufchâtel, 102.
    Roquefort, 155.
    Swiss, 283.

  Sammis, J. L., 95, 228, 296, 337, 347, 349.

  Sammis, J. L., and A. T. Bruhn, 11, 41, 57, 229.

  Sammis, J. L., S. K. Suzuki and F. W. Laabs, 33.

  Sammis' method, 229.

  Sap sago, 294.

  Schenk, C., 165.

  Schmidt-Nielson, S., 36, 39.

  Schmierkäse, 90.

  Schroeder, E. C., 99.

  Schweitzer cheese, 276.

  Score-card,
    for Brick, 169.
    for Cheddar, 271.
    for Limburger, 146.
    for starter, 51.
    for Swiss, 287.

  Sediment test, 27, 28.

  Semi-hard cheeses, 149-171.

  Setting, 71.

  Shaw, R. H. (and C. H. Eckles), 7.

  Sheep's milk, 151, 152.

  Sheep's milk cheese, 150.

  Sheldon, J. P., 161.

  Shot-gun cans, 97.

  Size factor in ripening, 263.

  Skim cheese, 89, 361, 366.
    bacteria, 134-147.
    Cheddar, 241-246.
    Neufchâtel, 105, 107.
    ripened by molds, 111.

  Soft cheeses, 82-83, 86.

  Solids not fat, 335-337.

  Speed knife, 217.

  Spiro, K., 36, 39.

  Square cream, 109.

  Standards, 359.

  Starter, 42.
    amount to use, 52.
    care of milk for, 47.
    commercial, 43.
    containers for, 45.
    for Brick, 165.
    for Camembert, 121.
    for Cheddar, 189.
    for Neufchâtel, 99.
    for Roquefort, 153.
    for Swiss, 279.
    handling, 42-50.
    lot-card for, 53.
    "mother," 47
    natural, 42.
    pasteurization of, 45.
    propagation of, 46-48.
    qualities of, 50.
    score-card for, 51.

  Startoline, 47.

  State brands, 360.

  Stevenson, C., 29.

  Stilton cheese, 161-163.

  Stirred curd cheese, 232.

  Stocking, W. A., Jr., 22, 23, 25.

  Storage of cheese, 103.

  Streptococcus lacticus, 41.

  Streptothrix-actinomyces group, 21.

  Succinic acid, 254.

  Suzuki, S. K., 247.

  Sweet curd cheese, 236.

  Swiss cheese, 80, 86, 173, 276-288, 358, 366, 368, 371.
    block, 278.
    breaking, 281.
    composition, 287.
    curing, 283.
    cutting, 280.
    drum, 278.
    eyes in, 283-285.
    factories, 276-278.
    making process, 280-283.
    pressing, 282.
    quality in, 286.
    rennet for, 279.
    salting, 283.
    score-card for, 287.
    starter for, 279.
    testing, Chapter XIX, 327.

  Swiss harp, 278.


  Tests,
    acid, 60, 61.
    Babcock, 327-334.
    casein, 334.
    curd, 26.
    fat, 327.
    fermentation, 26.
    Hart, 334.
    hot-iron, 201.
    lactometer, 335-337.
    moisture in cheese, 337-342.
    rennet, 62.
    sediment, 27, 28.
    solids not fat, 335-337.
    Troy's moisture, 337-342.

  Thom, C., 117, 154, 155, 158, 372.

  Thom, C., and S. H. Ayers, 21.

  Thom, C., and J. N. Currie, 156.

  Thom, C., J. N. Currie, and K. J. Matheson, 116, 152.

  Thom, C., and K. J. Matheson, 149.

  Tinfoil wrapping, 145.

  Todd, A., and E. C. V. Cornish, 29.

  Tolstrup, R. M., 91.

  Trappist, 169.

  Trier, 272.

  Troy, H. C., 337.

  Trypsin, 30.

  Twins, 230.

  Tyrein, 35.


  U. S. Census Report, quoted, 317, 318 to 322.

  U. S. Dept. Agr. Yearbooks, quoted, 326.

  U. S. Treasury Dept. Hygienic Laboratory Bulletin, 22.

  Utensils, 24.


  Valerianic acid in cheese, 136.

  Van Dam, W., 29, 36, 39.

  Van Eyck Machine Co., 98.

  Van Herwerden, M., 36, 39.

  Van Slyke, L. L., 8, 223, 224, 225, 251, 257, 262.

  Van Slyke, L. L., and A. W. Bosworth, 9, 36, 39, 40, 249.

  Van Slyke, L. L., and D. D. Van Slyke, 33.

  Van Slyke, L. L., and E. B. Hart, 38, 40, 91, 201, 249, 256.

  Van Slyke, L. L., and C. A. Publow, 310.

  Van Slyke, L. L., and O. B. Winter, 249.

  Vat, 190.

  Vermont Exp. Sta. Rept., 7.

  Victor curd mill, 208.


  Ward, A. R., 217.

  Washed curd process, 236.

  Water in milk, 8.

  Welsh rabbit, 377.

  Wensleydale, 184.

  Whey, 222.

  Whey butter, 295.

  Whey cheese, 85, 295.

  Whey siphon, 202.

  Whey strainer, 202, 203.

  Whey tank, 301, 303.

  White cheese, 109.

  Williams, Jesse, 313.

  Wilson hoop, 212.

  Wing, Lois W., 25.

  Wisconsin Agr. Law, 13, 347.

  Wisconsin curd test, 26.

  Wisconsin pasteurized Cheddar, 229.

  Wisconsin Sta. Bul., quoted, 7, 8, 10, 26, 251, 253.

  Working of curd, 102, 135.

  Wuethrich, F., 165.


  Yeasts, 21.

  Yield of, Brick, 169.
    Camembert, 130.
    Cheddar, 226.
    Limburger, 146.
    Neufchâtel (whole milk), 107.
    Swiss, 287.

  Young America, 230.


  Zumkehr, P. 139.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following pages contain advertisements of a
few of the Macmillan books on kindred subjects


THE RURAL TEXT-BOOK SERIES

EDITED BY L. H. BAILEY

Butter

BY E. S. GUTHRIE

Professor in the Dairy Department, New York State College of
Agriculture, Cornell University

A practical discussion of the general characteristics of butter, and of
all of the problems connected with its manufacture and marketing,
together with a brief history of the product. Among the topics
considered are the history of butter; composition and food value of
butter; cleansing and care of dairy utensils; care of milk and cream;
cream separation; grading milk and cream and neutralizing acidity;
pasteurization; cream ripening; churning, washing, salting and packing
butter; flavors of butter; storage of butter; marketing; whey butter,
renovated and ladled butter; margarine, and testing.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Publishers      64-66 Fifth Avenue      New York


A Manual of Milk Products

BY W. A. STOCKING, JR.

Professor of Dairy Bacteriology in the New York State College of
Agriculture at Cornell University

_$2.00_

This is the most recent addition to the Rural Manual Series under the
editorship of L. H. Bailey. The work is intended to serve as a reference
book covering the entire subject of milk and its products. There are
chapters on The Chemical Composition of Milk, The Factors Which
Influence Its Composition, Physical Properties, The Various Tests Used
in the Study of Milk, The Production and Handling of Milk, Butter
Making, The Cream Supply, Butter Making on the Farm, Cheese Making, and
the Bacteriology of Dairy Products.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Publishers      64-66 Fifth Avenue      New York


The Modern Milk Problem

BY J. SCOTT MACNUTT

Lecturer on Public Health Service in the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology

_With 16 plates and 22 illustrations. Cloth, 12mo, $2.00_

Notwithstanding the fact that the milk problem is constantly growing
more acute in many parts of the United States, no book has thus far
appeared treating, in a brief space, its main aspects and stressing the
practical and economic as well as the sanitary factors involved. The
present volume is designed to fill this obvious need by providing a
convenient survey of a perplexing subject--not merely for health
officials and milk inspectors, but also for dairy-men and city milk
dealers, agricultural authorities, legislators charged with the framing
of milk laws, inquiring consumers and members of organizations engaged
in efforts to secure better milk supplies, physicians, and all others
who are interested in the understanding and solution of the milk
problem. The entire work is essentially practical and valuable as a
constant reference.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Publishers      64-66 Fifth Avenue      New York


Cooperation: The Hope of the Consumer

BY EMERSON P. HARRIS

President of the Montclair Coöperative Society. With an Introduction by
JOHN GRAHAM BROOKS.

  _Cloth, 12mo_

The author's purpose has been to discuss coöperative purchasing, to show
why it is desirable, to indicate the evils which it reforms, to present
the operation of a coöperative store and to consider the difficulties
which must be overcome.

The titles of the four parts into which this work is divided are as
follows: The Failure of Our Middlemanism, Reasons and the Remedy,
Practical Coöperation, Background and Outlook.


The Marketing of Farm Products

BY L. D. H. WELD

  _$1.60_

This book aims to set forth the fundamental principles of market
distribution as applied to the marketing of agricultural products. It
begins by pointing out the place that marketing occupies in the general
field of economics, and by applying accepted economic principles to the
marketing process. It then explains the general organization and methods
of marketing, beginning with marketing at country points, and passes on
to a description of the methods and functions of the various classes of
wholesale dealers. After describing the factors affecting the cost of
marketing, illustrated by data concerning the marketing of certain
specific products, a number of special problems are treated, such as
price quotations, future trading, inspection and grading, public
markets, coöperative marketing, etc.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Publishers      64-66 Fifth Avenue      New York



  +----------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's note:                                            |
  |                                                                |
  | The original text contains a large number of words which occur |
  | in hyphenated and spaced forms with comparable frequency. Such |
  | inconsistencies have been retained in this version.            |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------+





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF CHEESE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Complete Book of Cheese
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Complete Book of Cheese

Author: Bob Brown

Release date: December 7, 2004 [eBook #14293]
                Most recently updated: December 18, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Starner, Ronald Holder and the PG Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE BOOK OF CHEESE ***




Produced by David Starner, Ronald Holder and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team






BOB BROWN


The Complete Book
of Cheese


_Illustrations by_ Eric Blegvad

[Illustration]

_Gramercy Publishing Company

New York_
1955


_Author of_

THE WINE COOK BOOK

AMERICA COOKS

10,000 SNACKS

SALADS AND HERBS

THE SOUTH AMERICAN COOK BOOK

SOUPS, SAUCES AND GRAVIES

THE VEGETABLE COOK BOOK

LOOK BEFORE YOU COOK!

THE EUROPEAN COOK BOOK

THE WINING AND DINING QUIZ

MOST FOR YOUR MONEY

OUTDOOR COOKING

FISH AND SEAFOOD COOK BOOK

THE COUNTRY COOK BOOK

_Co-author of Food and Drink Books by_ The Browns

LET THERE BE BEER!

HOMEMADE HILARITY




[Illustration: TO]

TO

PHIL

ALPERT

_Turophile Extraordinary_




[Illustration: Contents]

1 I Remember Cheese

2 The Big Cheese

3 Foreign Greats

4 Native Americans

5 Sixty-five Sizzling Rabbits

6 The Fondue

7 Soufflés, Puffs and Ramekins

8 Pizzas, Blintzes, Pastes and Cheese Cake

9 Au Gratin, Soups, Salads and Sauces

10 Appetizers, Crackers, Sandwiches, Savories,
Snacks, Spreads and Toasts

11 "Fit for Drink"

12 Lazy Lou


APPENDIX--The A-B-Z of Cheese

INDEX OF RECIPES




[Illustration]

_Chapter One_

I Remember Cheese


Cheese market day in a town in the north of Holland. All the
cheese-fanciers are out, thumping the cannon-ball Edams and the
millstone Goudas with their bare red knuckles, plugging in with a
hollow steel tool for samples. In Holland the business of judging a
crumb of cheese has been taken with great seriousness for centuries.
The abracadabra is comparable to that of the wine-taster or
tea-taster. These Edamers have the trained ear of music-masters and,
merely by knuckle-rapping, can tell down to an air pocket left by a
gas bubble just how mature the interior is.

The connoisseurs use gingerbread as a mouth-freshener; and I, too,
that sunny day among the Edams, kept my gingerbread handy and made my
way from one fine cheese to another, trying out generous plugs from
the heaped cannon balls that looked like the ammunition dump at
Antietam.

I remember another market day, this time in Lucerne. All morning I
stocked up on good Schweizerkäse and better Gruyère. For lunch I had
cheese salad. All around me the farmers were rolling two-hundred-pound
Emmentalers, bigger than oxcart wheels. I sat in a little café,
absorbing cheese and cheese lore in equal quantities. I learned that a
prize cheese must be chock-full of equal-sized eyes, the gas holes
produced during fermentation. They must glisten like polished bar
glass. The cheese itself must be of a light, lemonish yellow. Its
flavor must be nutlike. (Nuts and Swiss cheese complement each other
as subtly as Gorgonzola and a ripe banana.) There are, I learned,
"blind" Swiss cheeses as well, but the million-eyed ones are better.

But I don't have to hark back to Switzerland and Holland for cheese
memories. Here at home we have increasingly taken over the cheeses of
all nations, first importing them, then imitating them, from Swiss
Engadine to what we call Genuine Sprinz. We've naturalized
Scandinavian Blues and smoked browns and baptized our own Saaland
Pfarr in native whiskey. Of fifty popular Italian types we duplicate
more than half, some fairly well, others badly.

We have our own legitimate offspring too, beginning with the
Pineapple, supposed to have been first made about 1845 in Litchfield
County, Connecticut. We have our own creamy Neufchâtel, New York Coon,
Vermont Sage, the delicious Liederkranz, California Jack, Nuworld, and
dozens of others, not all quite so original.

And, true to the American way, we've organized cheese-eating. There's
an annual cheese week, and a cheese month (October). We even boast a
mail-order Cheese-of-the-Month Club. We haven't yet reached the point
of sophistication, however, attained by a Paris cheese club that meets
regularly. To qualify for membership you have to identify two hundred
basic cheeses, and you have to do it blindfolded.

This is a test I'd prefer not to submit to, but in my amateur way I
have during the past year or two been sharpening my cheese perception
with whatever varieties I could encounter around New York. I've run
into briny Caucasian Cossack, Corsican Gricotta, and exotics like
Rarush Durmar, Travnik, and Karaghi La-la. Cheese-hunting is one of
the greatest--and least competitively crowded--of sports. I hope this
book may lead others to give it a try.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Two_

The Big Cheese


One of the world's first outsize cheeses officially weighed in at four
tons in a fair at Toronto, Canada, seventy years ago. Another
monstrous Cheddar tipped the scales at six tons in the New York State
Fair at Syracuse in 1937.

Before this, a one-thousand-pounder was fetched all the way from New
Zealand to London to star in the Wembley Exposition of 1924. But,
compared to the outsize Syracusan, it looked like a Baby Gouda. As a
matter of fact, neither England nor any of her great dairying colonies
have gone in for mammoth jobs, except Canada, with that four-tonner
shown at Toronto.

We should mention two historic king-size Chesters. You can find out
all about them in _Cheddar Gorge,_ edited by Sir John Squire. The
first of them weighed 149 pounds, and was the largest made, up to the
year 1825. It was proudly presented to H.R.H. the Duke of York. (Its
heft almost tied the 147-pound Green County wheel of Wisconsin Swiss
presented by the makers to President Coolidge in 1928 in appreciation
of his raising the protective tariff against genuine Swiss to 50
percent.) While the cheese itself weighed a mite under 150, His Royal
Highness, ruff, belly, knee breeches, doffed high hat and all, was a
hundred-weight heavier, and thus almost dwarfed it.

It was almost a century later that the second record-breaking Chester
weighed in, at only 200 pounds. Yet it won a Gold Medal and a
Challenge Cup and was presented to the King, who graciously accepted
it. This was more than Queen Victoria had done with a bridal gift
cheese that tipped the scales at 1,100 pounds. It took a whole day's
yield from 780 contented cows, and stood a foot and eight inches high,
measuring nine feet, four inches around the middle. The assembled
donors of the cheese were so proud of it that they asked royal
permission to exhibit it on a round of country fairs. The Queen
assented to this ambitious request, perhaps prompted by the
exhibition-minded Albert. The publicity-seeking cheesemongers assured
Her Majesty that the gift would be returned to her just as soon as it
had been exhibited. But the Queen didn't want it back after it was
show-worn. The donors began to quarrel among themselves about what to
do with the remains, until finally it got into Chancery where so many
lost causes end their days. The cheese was never heard of again.

While it is generally true that the bigger the cheese the better,
(much the same as a magnum bottle of champagne is better than a pint),
there is a limit to the obesity of a block, ball or brick of almost
any kinds of cheese. When they pass a certain limit, they lack
homogeneity and are not nearly so good as the smaller ones. Today a
good magnum size for an exhibition Cheddar is 560 pounds; for a prize
Provolone, 280 pounds; while a Swiss wheel of only 210 will draw
crowds to any food-shop window.

Yet by and large it's the monsters that get into the Cheese Hall of
Fame and come down to us in song and story. For example, that four-ton
Toronto affair inspired a cheese poet, James McIntyre, who doubled as
the local undertaker.

    We have thee, mammoth cheese,
    Lying quietly at your ease;
    Gently fanned by evening breeze,
    Thy fair form no flies dare seize.

    All gaily dressed soon you'll go
    To the greatest provincial show,
    To be admired by many a beau
    In the city of Toronto.

    May you not receive a scar as
    We have heard that Mr. Harris
    Intends to send you off as far as
    The great world's show at Paris.

    Of the youth beware of these,
    For some of them might rudely squeeze
    And bite your cheek; then song or glees
    We could not sing, oh, Queen of Cheese.

An ode to a one hundred percent American mammoth was inspired by "The
Ultra-Democratic, Anti-Federalist Cheese of Cheshire." This was in the
summer of 1801 when the patriotic people of Cheshire, Massachusetts,
turned out en masse to concoct a mammoth cheese on the village green
for presentation to their beloved President Jefferson. The unique
demonstration occurred spontaneously in jubilant commemoration of the
greatest political triumph of a new country in a new century--the
victory of the Democrats over the Federalists. Its collective making
was heralded in Boston's _Mercury and New England Palladium_,
September 8, 1801:

    _The Mammoth Cheese_

    AN EPICO-LYRICO BALLAD

    From meadows rich, with clover red,
      A thousand heifers come;
    The tinkling bells the tidings spread,
    The milkmaid muffles up her head,
      And wakes the village hum.

    In shining pans the snowy flood
      Through whitened canvas pours;
    The dyeing pots of otter good
    And rennet tinged with madder blood
      Are sought among their stores.

    The quivering curd, in panniers stowed,
      Is loaded on the jade,
    The stumbling beast supports the load,
    While trickling whey bedews the road
      Along the dusty glade.

    As Cairo's slaves, to bondage bred,
      The arid deserts roam,
    Through trackless sands undaunted tread,
    With skins of water on their head
      To cheer their masters home,

    So here full many a sturdy swain
      His precious baggage bore;
    Old misers e'en forgot their gain,
    And bed-rid cripples, free from pain,
      Now took the road before.

    The widow, with her dripping mite
      Upon her saddle horn,
    Rode up in haste to see the sight
    And aid a charity so right,
      A pauper so forlorn.

    The circling throng an opening drew
      Upon the verdant-grass
    To let the vast procession through
    To spread their rich repast in view,
      And Elder J. L. pass.

    Then Elder J. with lifted eyes
      In musing posture stood,
    Invoked a blessing from the skies
    To save from vermin, mites and flies,
      And keep the bounty good.

    Now mellow strokes the yielding pile
      From polished steel receives,
    And shining nymphs stand still a while,
    Or mix the mass with salt and oil,
      With sage and savory leaves.

    Then sextonlike, the patriot troop,
      With naked arms and crown,
    Embraced, with hardy hands, the scoop,
    And filled the vast expanded hoop,
      While beetles smacked it down.

    Next girding screws the ponderous beam,
      With heft immense, drew down;
    The gushing whey from every seam
    Flowed through the streets a rapid stream,
      And shad came up to town.

This spirited achievement of early democracy is commemorated today by
a sign set up at the ancient and honorable town of Cheshire, located
between Pittsfield and North Adams, on Route 8.

Jefferson's speech of thanks to the democratic people of Cheshire
rings out in history: "I look upon this cheese as a token of fidelity
from the very heart of the people of this land to the great cause of
equal rights to all men."

This popular presentation started a tradition. When Van Buren
succeeded to the Presidency, he received a similar mammoth cheese in
token of the high esteem in which he was held. A monstrous one, bigger
than the Jeffersonian, was made by New Englanders to show their
loyalty to President Jackson. For weeks this stood in state in the
hall of the White House. At last the floor was a foot deep in the
fragments remaining after the enthusiastic Democrats had eaten their
fill.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Three_

Foreign Greats

        _Ode to Cheese_


    God of the country, bless today Thy cheese,
    For which we give Thee thanks on bended knees.
    Let them be fat or light, with onions blent,
    Shallots, brine, pepper, honey; whether scent
    Of sheep or fields is in them, in the yard
    Let them, good Lord, at dawn be beaten hard.
    And let their edges take on silvery shades
    Under the moist red hands of dairymaids;
    And, round and greenish, let them go to town
    Weighing the shepherd's folding mantle down;
    Whether from Parma or from Jura heights,
    Kneaded by august hands of Carmelites,
    Stamped with the mitre of a proud abbess.
    Flowered with the perfumes of the grass of Bresse,
    From hollow Holland, from the Vosges, from Brie,
    From Roquefort, Gorgonzola, Italy!
    Bless them, good Lord! Bless Stilton's royal fare,
    Red Cheshire, and the tearful cream Gruyère.

    FROM JETHRO BITHELL'S TRANSLATION
    OF A POEM BY M. Thomas Braun

     _Symphonie des Fromages_

     A giant Cantal, seeming to have been chopped open with an ax,
     stood aside of a golden-hued Chester and a Swiss Gruyère
     resembling the wheel of a Roman chariot There were Dutch Edams,
     round and blood-red, and Port-Saluts lined up like soldiers on
     parade. Three Bries, side by side, suggested phases of the moon;
     two of them, very dry, were amber-colored and "full," and the
     third, in its second quarter, was runny and creamy, with a "milky
     way" which no human barrier seemed able to restrain. And all the
     while majestic Roqueforts looked down with princely contempt upon
     the other, through the glass of their crystal covers.

     Emile Zola

In 1953 the United States Department of Agriculture published Handbook
No. 54, entitled _Cheese Varieties and Descriptions,_ with this
comment: "There probably are only about eighteen distinct types or
kinds of natural cheese." All the rest (more than 400 names) are of
local origin, usually named after towns or communities. A list of the
best-known names applied to each of these distinct varieties or groups
is given:

        Brick        Gouda         Romano
        Camembert    Hand          Roquefort
        Cheddar      Limburger     Sapsago
        Cottage      Neufchâtel    Swiss
        Cream        Parmesan      Trappist
        Edam         Provolone     Whey cheeses (Mysost and Ricotta)


May we nominate another dozen to form our own Cheese Hall of Fame? We
begin our list with a partial roll call of the big Blues family and
end it with members of the monastic order of Port-Salut Trappist that
includes Canadian Oka and our own Kentucky thoroughbred.


The Blues that Are Green

Stilton, Roquefort and Gorgonzola form the triumvirate that rules a
world of lesser Blues. They are actually green, as green as the
mythical cheese the moon is made of.

In almost every, land where cheese is made you can sample a handful of
lesser Blues and imitations of the invincible three and try to
classify them, until you're blue in the face. The best we can do in
this slight summary is to mention a few of the most notable, aside
from our own Blues of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oregon and other states
that major in cheese.

Danish Blues are popular and splendidly made, such as "Flower of
Denmark." The Argentine competes with a pampas-grass Blue all its own.
But France and England are the leaders in this line, France first with
a sort of triple triumvirate within a triumvirate--Septmoncel, Gex,
and Sassenage, all three made with three milks mixed together: cow,
goat and sheep. Septmoncel is the leader of these, made in the Jura
mountains and considered by many French caseophiles to outrank
Roquefort.

This class of Blue or marbled cheese is called fromage persillé, as
well as fromage bleu and pate bleue. Similar mountain cheeses are made
in Auvergne and Aubrac and have distinct qualities that have brought
them fame, such as Cantal, bleu d'Auvergne Guiole or Laguiole, bleu de
Salers, and St. Flour. Olivet and Queville come within the color
scheme, and sundry others such as Champoléon, Journiac, Queyras and
Sarraz.

Of English Blues there are several celebrities beside Stilton and
Cheshire Stilton. Wensleydale was one in the early days, and still
is, together with Blue Dorset, the deepest green of them all, and
esoteric Blue Vinny, a choosey cheese not liked by everybody, the
favorite of Thomas Hardy.


Brie

Sheila Hibben once wrote in _The New Yorker:_

I can't imagine any difference of opinion about Brie's being the queen
of all cheeses, and if there is any such difference, I shall certainly
ignore it. The very shape of Brie--so uncheese-like and so charmingly
fragile--is exciting. Nine times out of ten a Brie will let you
down--will be all caked into layers, which shows it is too young, or
at the over-runny stage, which means it is too old--but when you come
on the tenth Brie, _coulant_ to just the right, delicate creaminess,
and the color of fresh, sweet butter, no other cheese can compare with
it.

The season of Brie, like that of oysters, is simple to remember: only
months with an "R," beginning with September, which is the best, bar
none.


Caciocavallo

From Bulgaria to Turkey the Italian "horse cheese," as Caciocavallo
translates, is as universally popular as it is at home and in all the
Little Italics throughout the rest of the world. Flattering imitations
are made and named after it, as follows:

    BULGARIA:       Kascaval

    GREECE:         Kashcavallo and Caskcaval

    HUNGARY:        Parenica

    RUMANIA:        Pentele and Kascaval

    SERBIA:         Katschkawalj

    SYRIA:          Cashkavallo

    TRANSYLVANIA:   Kascaval (as in Rumania)

    TURKEY:         Cascaval Penir

    YUGOSLAVIA:     Kackavalj

A horse's head printed on the cheese gave rise to its popular name and
to the myth that it is made of mare's milk. It is, however, curded
from cow's milk, whole or partly skimmed, and sometimes from water
buffalo; hard, yellow and so buttery that the best of it, which comes
from Sorrento, is called _Cacio burro,_ butter cheese. Slightly salty,
with a spicy tang, it is eaten sliced when young and mild and used for
grating and seasoning when old, not only on the usual Italian pastes
but on sweets.

Different from the many grating cheeses made from little balls of curd
called _grana_, Caciocavallo is a _pasta fileta_, or drawn-curd
product. Because of this it is sometimes drawn out in long thick
threads and braided. It is a cheese for skilled artists to make
sculptures with, sometimes horses' heads, again bunches of grapes and
other fruits, even as Provolone is shaped like apples and pears and
often worked into elaborate bas-relief designs. But ordinarily the
horse's head is a plain tenpin in shape or a squat bottle with a knob
on the side by which it has been tied up, two cheeses at a time, on
opposite sides of a rafter, while being smoked lightly golden and
rubbed with olive oil and butter to make it all the more buttery.

In Calabria and Sicily it is very popular, and although the best comes
from Sorrento, there is keen competition from Abruzzi, Apulian
Province and Molise. It keeps well and doesn't spoil when shipped
overseas.

In his _Little Book of Cheese_ Osbert Burdett recommends the high,
horsy strength of this smoked Cacio over tobacco smoke after dinner:

     Only monsters smoke at meals, but a monster assured me that
     Gorgonzola best survives this malpractice. Clearly, some pungency
     is necessary, and confidence suggests rather Cacio which would
     survive anything, the monster said.

Camembert

Camembert is called "mold-matured" and all that is genuine is labeled
_Syndicat du Vrai Camembert_. The name in full is _Syndicat des
Fabricants du Veritable Camembert de Normandie_ and we agree that this
is "a most useful association for the defense of one of the best
cheeses of France." Its extremely delicate piquance cannot be matched,
except perhaps by Brie.

Napoleon is said to have named it and to have kissed the waitress who
first served it to him in the tiny town of Camembert. And there a
statue stands today in the market place to honor Marie Harel who made
the first Camembert.

Camembert is equally good on thin slices of apple, pineapple, pear,
French "flute" or pumpernickel. As-with Brie and with oysters,
Camembert should be eaten only in the "R" months, and of these
September is the best.

Since Camembert rhymes with beware, if you can't get the _véritable_
don't fall for a domestic imitation or any West German abomination
such as one dressed like a valentine in a heart-shaped box and labeled
"Camembert--Cheese Exquisite." They are equally tasteless, chalky with
youth, or choking with ammoniacal gas when old and decrepit.

Cheddar

The English _Encyclopedia of Practical Cookery_ says:

     Cheddar cheese is one of the kings of cheese; it is pale coloured,
     mellow, salvy, and, when good, resembling a hazelnut in flavour.
     The Cheddar principle pervades the whole cheesemaking districts
     of America, Canada and New Zealand, but no cheese imported into
     England can equal the Cheddars of Somerset and the West of
     Scotland.

Named for a village near Bristol where farmer Joseph Harding first
manufactured it, the best is still called Farmhouse Cheddar, but in
America we have practically none of this. Farmhouse Cheddar must be
ripened at least nine months to a mellowness, and little of our
American cheese gets as much as that. Back in 1695 John Houghton wrote
that it "contended in goodness (if kept from two to five years,
according to magnitude) with any cheese in England."

Today it is called "England's second-best cheese," second after
Stilton, of course.

In early days a large cheese sufficed for a year or two of family
feeding, according to this old note: "A big Cheddar can be kept for
two years in excellent condition if kept in a cool room and turned
over every other day."

But in old England some were harder to preserve: "In Bath... I asked
one lady of the larder how she kept Cheddar cheese. Her eyes twinkled:
'We don't keep cheese; we eats it.'"

Cheshire

A Cheshireman sailed into Spain
To trade for merchandise;
When he arrived from the main
A Spaniard him espies.
Who said, "You English rogue, look here!
What fruits and spices fine
Our land produces twice a year.
Thou has not such in thine."

The Cheshireman ran to his hold
And fetched a Cheshire cheese,
And said, "Look here, you dog, behold!
We have such fruits as these.
Your fruits are ripe but twice a year,
As you yourself do say,
But such as I present you here
Our land brings twice a day."

Anonymous

     Let us pass on to cheese. We have some glorious cheeses, and far
     too few people glorying in them. The Cheddar of the inn, of the
     chophouse, of the average English home, is a libel on a thing
     which, when authentic, is worthy of great honor. Cheshire,
     divinely commanded into existence as to three parts to precede
     and as to one part to accompany certain Tawny Ports and some
     Late-Bottled Ports, can be a thing for which the British Navy
     ought to fire a salute on the principle on which Colonel Brisson
     made his regiment salute when passing the great Burgundian
     vineyard.

     T. Earle Welby,

     IN "THE DINNER KNELL"

Cheshire is not only the most literary cheese in England, but the
oldest. It was already manufactured when Caesar conquered Britain, and
tradition is that the Romans built the walled city of Chester to
control the district where the precious cheese was made. Chester on
the River Dee was a stronghold against the Roman invasion.

It came to fame with The Old Cheshire Cheese in Elizabethan times and
waxed great with Samuel Johnson presiding at the Fleet Street Inn
where White Cheshire was served "with radishes or watercress or celery
when in season," and Red Cheshire was served toasted or stewed in a
sort of Welsh Rabbit. (_See_ Chapter 5.)

The Blue variety is called Cheshire-Stilton, and Vyvyan Holland, in
_Cheddar Gorge_ suggests that "it was no doubt a cheese of this sort,
discovered and filched from the larder of the Queen of Hearts, that
accounted for the contented grin on the face of the Cheshire Cat in
Alice in Wonderland."

All very English, as recorded in Victor Meusy's couplet:

    _Dans le Chester sec et rose
    A longues dents, l'Anglais mord._

    In the Chester dry and pink
    The long teeth of the English sink.

Edam and Gouda
     _Edam in Peace and War_

There also coming into the river two Dutchmen, we sent a couple of men
on board and brought three Holland cheeses, cost 4d. a piece,
excellent cheeses.

Pepys' _Diary_, March 2,1663

     Commodore Coe, of the Montevidian Navy, defeated Admiral Brown of
     the Buenos Ayrean Navy, in a naval battle, when he used Holland
     cheese for cannon balls.

     _The Harbinger_ (Vermont), December 11, 1847

The crimson cannon balls of Holland have been heard around the world.
Known as "red balls" in England and _katzenkopf,_ "cat's head," in
Germany, they differ from Gouda chiefly in the shape, Gouda being
round but flattish and now chiefly imported as one-pound Baby Goudas.

Edam when it is good is very, very good, but when it is bad it is
horrid. Sophisticated ones are sent over already scalloped for the
ultimate consumer to add port, and there are crocks of Holland cheese
potted with sauterne. Both Edam and Gouda should be well aged to
develop full-bodied quality, two years being the accepted standard for
Edam.

The best Edams result from a perfect combination of Breed
(black-and-white Dutch Friesian) and Feed (the rich pasturage of
Friesland and Noord Holland).

The Goudas, shaped like English Derby and Belgian Delft and Leyden,
come from South Holland. Some are specially made for the Jewish trade
and called Kosher Gouda. Both Edam and Gouda are eaten at mealtimes
thrice daily in Holland. A Dutch breakfast without one or the other on
black bread with butter and black coffee would be unthinkable. They're
also boon companions to plum bread and Dutch cocoa.

"Eclair Edams" are those with soft insides.

Emmentaler, Gruyère and Swiss

    When the working woman
    Takes her midday lunch,
    It is a piece of Gruyère
    Which for her takes the place of roast.

Victor Meusy

Whether an Emmentaler is eminently Schweizerkäse, grand Gruyère from
France, or lesser Swiss of the United States, the shape, size and
glisten of the eyes indicate the stage of ripeness, skill of making
and quality of flavor. They must be uniform, roundish, about the size
of a big cherry and, most important of all, must glisten like the eye
of a lass in love, dry but with the suggestion of a tear.

Gruyère does not see eye to eye with the big-holed Swiss Saanen
cartwheel or American imitation. It has tiny holes, and many of them;
let us say it is freckled with pinholes, rather than pock-marked. This
variety is technically called a _niszler_, while one without any holes
at all is "blind." Eyes or holes are also called vesicles.

Gruyère Trauben (Grape Gruyère) is aged in Neuchâtel wine in
Switzerland, although most Gruyère has been made in France since its
introduction there in 1722. The most famous is made in the Jura, and
another is called Comté from its origin in Franche-Comté.

A blind Emmentaler was made in Switzerland for export to Italy where
it was hardened in caves to become a grating cheese called Raper, and
now it is largely imitated there. Emmentaler, in fact, because of its
piquant pecan-nut flavor and inimitable quality, is simulated
everywhere, even in Switzerland.

Besides phonies from Argentina and countries as far off as Finland, we
get a flood of imported and domestic Swisses of all sad sorts, with
all possible faults--from too many holes, that make a flabby, wobbly
cheese, to too few--cracked, dried-up, collapsed or utterly ruined by
molding inside. So it will pay you to buy only the kind already marked
genuine in Switzerland. For there cheese such as Saanen takes six
years to ripen, improves with age, and keeps forever.

Cartwheels well over a hundred years old are still kept in cheese
cellars (as common in Switzerland as wine cellars are in France), and
it is said that the rank of a family is determined by the age and
quality of the cheese in its larder.


Feta and Casere

The Greeks have a name for it--Feta. Their neighbors call it Greek
cheese. Feta is to cheese what Hymettus is to honey. The two together
make ambrosial manna. Feta is soft and as blinding white as a plate of
fresh Ricotta smothered with sour cream. The whiteness is preserved by
shipping the cheese all the way from Greece in kegs sloshing full of
milk, the milk being renewed from time to time. Having been cured in
brine, this great sheep-milk curd is slightly salty and somewhat
sharp, but superbly spicy.

When first we tasted it fresh from the keg with salty milk dripping
through our fingers, we gave it full marks. This was at the Staikos
Brothers Greek-import store on West 23rd Street in Manhattan. We then
compared Feta with thin wisps of its grown-up brother, Casere. This
gray and greasy, hard and brittle palate-tickler of sheep's milk made
us bleat for more Feta.


Gorgonzola

Gorgonzola, least pretentious of the Blues triumvirate (including
Roquefort and Stilton) is nonetheless by common consent monarch of all
other Blues from Argentina to Denmark. In England, indeed, many
epicures consider Gorgonzola greater than Stilton, which is the
highest praise any cheese can get there. Like all great cheeses it
has been widely imitated, but never equaled. Imported Gorgonzola, when
fruity ripe, is still firm but creamy and golden inside with rich
green veins running through. Very pungent and highly flavored, it is
eaten sliced or crumbled to flavor salad dressings, like Roquefort.


Hablé Crème Chantilly

The name Hablé Crème Chantilly sounds French, but the cheese is
Swedish and actually lives up to the blurb in the imported package:
"The overall characteristic is indescribable and delightful
freshness."

This exclusive product of the Walk Gärd Creamery was hailed by Sheila
Hibben in _The New Yorker_ of May 6, 1950, as enthusiastically as
Brillat-Savarin would have greeted a new dish, or the Planetarium a
new star:

     Endeavoring to be as restrained as I can, I shall merely suggest
     that the arrival of Crème Chantilly is a historic event and that
     in reporting on it I feel something of the responsibility that
     the contemporaries of Madame Harel, the famous cheese-making lady
     of Normandy, must have felt when they were passing judgment on
     the first Camembert.

Miss Hibben goes on to say that only a fromage à la crème made in
Quebec had come anywhere near her impression of the new Swedish
triumph. She quotes the last word from the makers themselves: "This is
a very special product that has never been made on this earth before,"
and speaks of "the elusive flavor of mushrooms" before summing up,
"the exquisitely textured curd and the unexpectedly fresh flavor
combine to make it one of the most subtly enjoyable foods that have
come my way in a long time."

And so say we--all of us.

Hand Cheese

Hand cheese has this niche in our Cheese Hall of Fame not because we
consider it great, but because it is usually included among the
eighteen varieties on which the hundreds of others are based. It is
named from having been molded into its final shape by hand.
Universally popular with Germanic races, it is too strong for the
others. To our mind, Hand cheese never had anything that Allgäuer or
Limburger hasn't improved upon.

It is the only cheese that is commonly melted into steins of beer and
drunk instead of eaten. It is usually studded with caraway seeds, the
most natural spice for curds.


Limburger

Limburger has always been popular in America, ever since it was
brought over by German-American immigrants; but England never took to
it. This is eloquently expressed in the following entry in the English
_Encyclopedia of Practical Cookery_:

     Limburger cheese is chiefly famous for its pungently offensive
     odor. It is made from skimmed milk, and allowed to partially
     decompose before pressing. It is very little known in this
     country, and might be less so with advantage to consumers.

But this is libel. Butter-soft and sapid, Limburger has brought
gustatory pleasure to millions of hardy gastronomes since it came to
light in the province of Lüttich in Belgium. It has been Americanized
for almost a century and is by now one of the very few cheeses
successfully imitated here, chiefly in New York and Wisconsin.

Early Wisconsiners will never forget the Limburger Rebellion in Green
County, when the people rose in protest against the Limburger caravan
that was accustomed to park in the little town of Monroe where it was
marketed. They threatened to stage a modern Boston Tea Party and dump
the odoriferous bricks in the river, when five or six wagonloads were
left ripening in the sun in front of the town bank. The Limburger was
finally stored safely underground.


Livarot

Livarot has been described as decadent, "The very Verlaine of them
all," and Victor Meusy personifies it in a poem dedicated to all the
great French cheeses, of which we give a free translation:

    In the dog days
    In its overflowing dish
    Livarot gesticulates
    Or weeps like a child.


Münster

    At the diplomatic banquet
    One must choose his piece.
    All is politics,
    A cheese and a flag.

    You annoy the Russians
    If you take Chester;
    You irritate the Prussians
    In choosing Münster.


Victor Meusy

Like Limburger, this male cheese, often caraway-flavored, does not
fare well in England. Although over here we consider Münster far
milder than Limburger, the English writer Eric Weir in _When Madame
Cooks_ will have none of it:

I cannot think why this cheese was not thrown from the aeroplanes
during the war to spread panic amongst enemy troops. It would have
proved far more efficacious than those nasty deadly gases that kill
people permanently.


Neufchâtel

    If the cream cheese be white
    Far fairer the hands that made them.

    Arthur Hugh Clough

Although originally from Normandy, Neufchâtel, like Limburger, was so
long ago welcomed to America and made so splendidly at home here that
we may consider it our very own. All we have against it is that it has
served as the model for too many processed abominations.

Parmesan, Romano, Pecorino, Pecorino Romano

Parmesan when young, soft and slightly crumbly is eaten on bread. But
when well aged, let us say up to a century, it becomes Rock of
Gibraltar of cheeses and really suited for grating. It is easy to
believe that the so-called "Spanish cheese" used as a barricade by
Americans in Nicaragua almost a century ago was none other than the
almost indestructible Grana, as Parmesan is called in Italy.

The association between cheese and battling began in B.C. days with
the Jews and Romans, who fed cheese to their soldiers not only for its
energy value but as a convenient form of rations, since every army
travels on its stomach and can't go faster than its impedimenta. The
last notable mention of cheese in war was the name of the _Monitor_:
"A cheese box on a raft."

Romano is not as expensive as Parmesan, although it is as friable,
sharp and tangy for flavoring, especially for soups such as onion and
minestrone. It is brittle and just off-white when well aged.

Although made of sheep's milk, Pecorino is classed with both Parmesan
and Romano. All three are excellently imitated in Argentina. Romano
and Pecorino Romano are interchangeable names for the strong,
medium-sharp and piquant Parmesan types that sell for considerably
less. Most of it is now shipped from Sardinia. There are several
different kinds: Pecorino Dolce (sweet), Sardo Tuscano, and Pecorino
Romano Cacio, which relates it to Caciocavallo.

Kibitzers complain that some of the cheaper types of Pecorino are
soapy, but fans give it high praise. Gillian F., in her "Letter from
Italy" in Osbert Burdett's delectable _Little Book of Cheese_, writes:

     Out in the orchard, my companion, I don't remember how, had
     provided the miracle: a flask of wine, a loaf of bread and a slab
     of fresh Pecorino cheese (there wasn't any "thou" for either) ...
     But that cheese was Paradise; and the flask was emptied, and a
     wood dove cooing made you think that the flask's contents were in
     a crystal goblet instead of an enamel cup ... one only ... and
     the cheese broken with the fingers ... a cheese of cheeses.


Pont L'Evêque

This semisoft, medium-strong, golden-tinted French classic made since
the thirteenth century, is definitely a dessert cheese whose
excellence is brought out best by a sound claret or tawny port.


Port-Salut (_See_ Trappist)


Provolone

Within recent years Provolone has taken America by storm, as
Camembert, Roquefort, Swiss, Limburger, Neufchâtel and such great
ones did long before. But it has not been successfully imitated here
because the original is made of rich water-buffalo milk unattainable
in the Americas.

With Caciocavallo, this mellow, smoky flavorsome delight is put up in
all sorts of artistic forms, red-cellophaned apples, pears, bells, a
regular zoo of animals, and in all sorts of sizes, up to a monumental
hundred-pound bas-relief imported for exhibition purposes by Phil
Alpert.


Roquefort

Homage to this _fromage!_ Long hailed as _le roi_ Roquefort, it has
filled books and booklets beyond count. By the miracle of _Penicillium
Roqueforti_ a new cheese was made. It is placed historically back
around the eighth century when Charlemagne was found picking out the
green spots of Persillé with the point of his knife, thinking them
decay. But the monks of Saint-Gall, who were his hosts, recorded in
their annals that when they regaled him with Roquefort (because it was
Friday and they had no fish) they also made bold to tell him he was
wasting the best part of the cheese. So he tasted again, found the
advice excellent and liked it so well he ordered two _caisses_ of it
sent every year to his palace at Aix-la-Chapelle. He also suggested
that it be cut in half first, to make sure it was well veined with
blue, and then bound up with a wooden fastening.

Perhaps he hoped the wood would protect the cheeses from mice and
rats, for the good monks of Saint-Gall couldn't be expected to send an
escort of cats from their chalky caves to guard them--even for
Charlemagne. There is no telling how many cats were mustered out in
the caves, in those early days, but a recent census put the number at
five hundred. We can readily imagine the head handler in the caves
leading a night inspection with a candle, followed by his chief taster
and a regiment of cats. While the Dutch and other makers of cheese
also employ cats to patrol their storage caves, Roquefort holds the
record for number. An interesting point in this connection is that as
rats and mice pick only the prime cheeses, a gnawed one is not thrown
away but greatly prized.


Sapsago, Schabziger or Swiss Green Cheese

The name Sapsago is a corruption of Schabziger, German for whey
cheese. It's a hay cheese, flavored heavily with melilot, a kind of
clover that's also grown for hay. It comes from Switzerland in a hard,
truncated cone wrapped in a piece of paper that says:

        To be used grated only
        Genuine Swiss Green Cheese
        Made of skimmed milk and herbs

    To the housewives! Do you want a change in your meals? Try the
    contents of this wrapper! Delicious as spreading mixed with butter,
    excellent for flavoring eggs, macaroni, spaghetti, potatoes, soup,
    etc. Can be used in place of any other cheese. _Do not take too
    much, you might spoil the flavor_.

We put this wrapper among our papers, sealed it tight in an envelope,
and to this day, six months later, the scent of Sapsago clings 'round
it still.


Stilton

     _Honor for Cheeses_

     Literary and munching circles in London are putting quite a lot
     of thought into a proposed memorial to Stilton cheese. There is a
     Stilton Memorial Committee, with Sir John Squire at the head, and
     already the boys are fighting.

     One side, led by Sir John, is all for a monument.

     This, presumably, would not be a replica of Stilton itself,
     although Mr. Epstein could probably hack out a pretty effective
     cheese-shaped figure and call it "Dolorosa."

     The monument-boosters plan a figure of Mrs. Paulet, who first
     introduced Stilton to England. (Possibly a group showing Mrs.
     Paulet holding a young Stilton by the hand and introducing it,
     while the Stilton curtsies.)

     T.S. Eliot does not think that anyone would look at a monument,
     but wants to establish a Foundation for the Preservation of
     Ancient Cheeses. The practicability of this plan would depend
     largely on the site selected for the treasure house and the cost
     of obtaining a curator who could, or would, give his whole time
     to the work.

     Mr. J.A. Symonds, who is secretary of the committee, agrees with
     Mr. Eliot that a simple statue is not the best form.

     "I should like," he says, "something irrelevant--gargoyles,
     perhaps."

     I think that Mr. Symonds has hit on something there.

     I would suggest, if we Americans can pitch into this great
     movement, some gargoyles designed by Mr. Rube Goldberg.

     If the memorial could be devised so as to take on an
     international scope, an exchange fellowship might be established
     between England and America, although the exchange, in the case
     of Stilton, would have to be all on England's side.

     We might be allowed to furnish the money, however, while England
     furnishes the cheese.

     There is a very good precedent for such a bargain between the two
     countries.

     Robert Benchley, in _After 1903--What?_

When all seems lost in England there is still Stilton, an endless
after-dinner conversation piece to which England points with pride.
For a sound appreciation of this cheese see Clifton Fadiman's
introduction to this book.


Taleggio and Bel Paese

When the great Italian cheese-maker, Galbini, first exported Bel Paese
some years ago, it was an eloquent ambassador to America. But as the
years went on and imitations were made in many lands, Galbini deemed
it wise to set up his own factory in _our_ beautiful country. However,
the domestic Bel Paese and a minute one-pounder called Bel Paesino
just didn't have that old Alpine zest. They were no better than the
German copy called Schönland, after the original, or the French Fleur
des Alpes.

Mel Fino was a blend of Bel Paese and Gorgonzola. It perked up the
market for a full, fruity cheese with snap. Then Galbini hit the
jackpot with his Taleggio that fills the need for the sharpest, most
sophisticated pungence of them all.


Trappist, Port-Salut, or Port du Salut, and Oka

In spite of its name Trappist is no rat-trap commoner. Always of the
elect, and better known as Port-Salut or Port du Salut from the
original home of the Trappist monks in their chief French abbey, it is
also set apart from the ordinary Canadians under the name of Oka, from
the Trappist monastery there. It is made by Trappist monks all over
the world, according to the original secret formula, and by Trappist
Cistercian monks at the Abbey of Gethsemani Trappist in Kentucky.

This is a soft cheese, creamy and of superb flavor. You can't go wrong
if you look for the monastery name stamped on, such as Harzé in
Belgium, Mont-des-Cats in Flanders, Sainte Anne d'Auray in Brittany,
and so forth.

Last but not least, a commercial Port-Salut entirely without benefit
of clergy or monastery is made in Milwaukee under the Lion Brand. It
is one of the finest American cheeses in which we have ever sunk a
fang.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Four_

Native Americans


American Cheddars

The first American Cheddar was made soon after 1620 around Plymouth by
Pilgrim fathers who brought along not only cheese from the homeland
but a live cow to continue the supply. Proof of our ability to
manufacture Cheddar of our own lies in the fact that by 1790 we were
exporting it back to England.

It was called Cheddar after the English original named for the village
of Cheddar near Bristol. More than a century ago it made a new name
for itself, Herkimer County cheese, from the section of New York State
where it was first made best. Herkimer still equals its several
distinguished competitors, Coon, Colorado Blackie, California Jack,
Pineapple, Sage, Vermont Colby and Wisconsin Longhorn.

The English called our imitation Yankee, or American, Cheddar, while
here at home it was popularly known as yellow or store cheese from its
prominent position in every country store; also apple-pie cheese
because of its affinity for the all-American dessert.

The first Cheddar factory was founded by Jesse Williams in Rome, New
York, just over a century ago and, with Herkimer County Cheddar
already widely known, this established "New York" as the preferred
"store-boughten" cheese.

An account of New York's cheese business in the pioneer Wooden Nutmeg
Era is found in Ernest Elmo Calkins' interesting book, _They Broke the
Prairies_. A Yankee named Silvanus Ferris, "the most successful
dairyman of Herkimer County," in the first decades of the 1800's
teamed up with Robert Nesbit, "the old Quaker Cheese Buyer." They
bought from farmers in the region and sold in New York City. And
"according to the business ethics of the times," Nesbit went ahead to
cheapen the cheese offered by deprecating its quality, hinting at a
bad market and departing without buying. Later when Ferris arrived in
a more optimistic mood, offering a slightly better price, the seller,
unaware they were partners, and ignorant of the market price, snapped
up the offer.

Similar sharp-trade tactics put too much green cheese on the market,
so those honestly aged from a minimum of eight months up to two years
fetched higher prices. They were called "old," such as Old Herkimer,
Old Wisconsin Longhorn, and Old California Jack.

Although the established Cheddar ages are three, fresh, medium-cured,
and cured or aged, commercially they are divided into two and
described as mild and sharp. The most popular are named for their
states: Colorado, Illinois, Kentucky, New York, Ohio, Vermont and
Wisconsin. Two New York Staters are called and named separately, Coon
and Herkimer County. Tillamook goes by its own name with no mention of
Oregon. Pineapple, Monterey Jack and Sage are seldom listed as
Cheddars at all, although they are basically that.


Brick

Brick is the one and only cheese for which the whole world gives
America credit. Runners-up are Liederkranz, which rivals say is too
close to Limburger, and Pineapple, which is only a Cheddar under its
crisscrossed, painted and flavored rind. Yet Brick is no more
distinguished than either of the hundred percent Americans, and in our
opinion is less worth bragging about.

It is a medium-firm, mild-to-strong slicing cheese for sandwiches and
melting in hot dishes. Its texture is elastic but not rubbery, its
taste sweetish, and it is full of little round holes or eyes. All this
has inspired enthusiasts to liken it to Emmentaler. The most
appropriate name for it has long been "married man's Limburger." To
make up for the mildness caraway seed is sometimes added.

About Civil War time, John Jossi, a dairyman of Dodge County,
Wisconsin, came up with this novelty, a rennet cheese made of whole
cow's milk. The curd is cut like Cheddar, heated, stirred and cooked
firm to put in a brick-shaped box without a bottom and with slits in
the sides to drain. When this is set on the draining table a couple of
bricks are also laid on the cooked curd for pressure. It is this
double use of bricks, for shaping and for pressing, that has led to
the confusion about which came first in originating the name.

The formed "bricks" of cheese are rubbed with salt for three days and
they ripen slowly, taking up to two months.

We eat several million pounds a year and 95 percent of that comes from
Wisconsin, with a trickle from New York.

Colorado Blackie Cheese

A subtly different American Cheddar is putting Colorado on our cheese
map. It is called Blackie from the black-waxed rind and it resembles
Vermont State cheese, although it is flatter. This is a proud new
American product, proving that although Papa Cheddar was born in
England his American kinfolk have developed independent and valuable
characters all on their own.


Coon Cheese

Coon cheese is full of flavor from being aged on shelves at a higher
temperature than cold storage. Its rind is darker from the growth of
mold and this shade is sometimes painted on more ordinary Cheddars to
make them look like Coon, which always brings a 10 percent premium
above the general run.

Made at Lowville, New York, it has received high praise from a host of
admirers, among them the French cook, Clementine, in Phineas Beck's
_Kitchen_, who raised it to the par of French immortals by calling it
Fromage de Coon. Clementine used it "with scintillating success in
countless French recipes which ended with the words _gratiner au four
et servir tres chaud_. She made _baguettes_ of it by soaking sticks
three-eights-inch square and one and a half inches long in lukewarm
milk, rolling them in flour, beaten egg and bread crumbs and browning
them instantaneously in boiling oil."


Herkimer County Cheese

The standard method for making American Cheddar was established in
Herkimer County, New York, in 1841 and has been rigidly maintained
down to this day. Made with rennet and a bacterial "starter," the curd
is cut and pressed to squeeze out all of the whey and then aged in
cylindrical forms for a year or more.

Herkimer leads the whole breed by being flaky, brittle, sharp and
nutty, with a crumb that will crumble, and a soft, mouth-watering pale
orange color when it is properly aged.


Isigny

Isigny is a native American cheese that came a cropper. It seems to be
extinct now, and perhaps that is all to the good, for it never meant
to be anything more than another Camembert, of which we have plenty of
imitation.

Not long after the Civil War the attempt was made to perfect Isigny.
The curd was carefully prepared according to an original formula,
washed and rubbed and set aside to come of age. But when it did, alas,
it was more like Limburger than Camembert, and since good domestic
Limburger was then a dime a pound, obviously it wouldn't pay off. Yet
in shape the newborn resembled Camembert, although it was much larger.
So they cut it down and named it after the delicate French Creme
d'lsigny.


Jack, California Jack and Monterey Jack

Jack was first known as Monterey cheese from the California county
where it originated. Then it was called Jack for short, and only now
takes its full name after sixty years of popularity on the West Coast.
Because it is little known in the East and has to be shipped so far,
it commands the top Cheddar price.

Monterey Jack is a stirred curd Cheddar without any annatto coloring.
It is sweeter than most and milder when young, but it gets sharper
with age and more expensive because of storage costs.


Liederkranz

No native American cheese has been so widely ballyhooed, and so
deservedly, as Liederkranz, which translates "Wreath of Song."

Back in the gay, inventive nineties, Emil Frey, a young delicatessen
keeper in New York, tried to please some bereft customers by making an
imitation of Bismarck Schlosskäse. This was imperative because the
imported German cheese didn't stand up during the long sea trip and
Emil's customers, mostly members of the famous Liederkranz singing
society, didn't feel like singing without it. But Emil's attempts at
imitation only added indigestion to their dejection, until one
day--_fabelhaft!_ One of those cheese dream castles in Spain came
true. He turned out a tawny, altogether golden, tangy and mellow
little marvel that actually was an improvement on Bismarck's old
Schlosskäse. Better than Brick, it was a deodorized Limburger, both a
man's cheese and one that cheese-conscious women adored.

Emil named it "Wreath of Song" for the Liederkranz customers. It soon
became as internationally known as tabasco from Texas or Parisian
Camembert which it slightly resembles. Borden's bought out Frey in
1929 and they enjoy telling the story of a G.I. who, to celebrate V-E
Day in Paris, sent to his family in Indiana, only a few miles from the
factory at Van Wert, Ohio, a whole case of what he had learned was
"the finest cheese France could make." And when the family opened it,
there was Liederkranz.

Another deserved distinction is that of being sandwiched in between
two foreign immortals in the following recipe:


 Schnitzelbank Pot

1 ripe Camembert cheese
1 Liederkranz
1/8 pound imported Roquefort
1/4 pound butter
1 tablespoon flour
1 cup cream
1/2 cup finely chopped olives
1/4 cup canned pimiento
A sprinkling of cayenne

     Depending on whether or not you like the edible rind of Camembert
     and Liederkranz, you can leave it on, scrape any thick part off,
     or remove it all. Mash the soft creams together with the
     Roquefort, butter and flour, using a silver fork. Put the mix
     into an enameled pan, for anything with a metal surface will
     turn the cheese black in cooking.

     Stir in the cream and keep stirring until you have a smooth,
     creamy sauce. Strain through sieve or cheesecloth, and mix in the
     olives and pimiento thoroughly. Sprinkle well with cayenne and
     put into a pot to mellow for a few days, or much longer.

The name _Schnitzelbank_ comes from "school bench," a game. This
snappy-sweet pot is specially suited to a beer party and stein songs.
It is also the affinity-spread with rye and pumpernickel, and may be
served in small sandwiches or on crackers, celery and such, to make
appetizing tidbits for cocktails, tea, or cider.

Like the trinity of cheeses that make it, the mixture is eaten best at
room temperature, when its flavor is fullest. If kept in the
refrigerator, it should be taken out a couple of hours before serving.
Since it is a natural cheese mixture, which has gone through no
process or doping with preservative, it will not keep more than two
weeks. This mellow-sharp mix is the sort of ideal the factory
processors shoot at with their olive-pimiento abominations. Once
you've potted your own, you'll find it gives the same thrill as
garnishing your own Liptauer.


Minnesota Blue

The discovery of sandstone caves in the bluffs along the Mississippi,
in and near the Twin Cities of Minnesota, has established a
distinctive type of Blue cheese named for the state. Although the
Roquefort process of France is followed and the cheese is inoculated
in the same way by mold from bread, it can never equal the genuine
imported, marked with its red-sheep brand, because the milk used in
Minnesota Blue is cow's milk, and the caves are sandstone instead of
limestone. Yet this is an excellent, Blue cheese in its own right.


Pineapple

Pineapple cheese is named after its shape rather than its flavor,
although there are rumors that some pineapple flavor is noticeable
near the oiled rind. This flavor does not penetrate through to the
Cheddar center. Many makers of processed cheese have tampered with the
original, so today you can't be sure of anything except getting a
smaller size every year or two, at a higher price. Originally six
pounds, the Pineapple has shrunk to nearly six ounces. The proper
bright-orange, oiled and shellacked surface is more apt to be a sickly
lemon.

Always an ornamental cheese, it once stood in state on the side-board
under a silver bell also made to represent a pineapple. You cut a top
slice off the cheese, just as you would off the fruit, and there was a
rose-colored, fine-tasting, mellow-hard cheese to spoon out with a
special silver cheese spoon or scoop. Between meals the silver top was
put on the silver holder and the oiled and shellacked rind kept the
cheese moist. Even when the Pineapple was eaten down to the rind the
shell served as a dunking bowl to fill with some salubrious cold
Fondue or salad.

Made in the same manner as Cheddar with the curd cooked harder,
Pineapple's distinction lies in being hung in a net that makes
diamond-shaped corrugations on the surface, simulating the sections of
the fruit. It is a pioneer American product with almost a century and
a half of service since Lewis M. Norton conceived it in 1808 in
Litchfield County, Connecticut. There in 1845 he built a factory and
made a deserved fortune out of his decorative ingenuity with what
before had been plain, unromantic yellow or store cheese.

Perhaps his inspiration came from cone-shaped Cheshire in old England,
also called Pineapple cheese, combined with the hanging up of
Provolones in Italy that leaves the looser pattern of the four
sustaining strings.


 Sage, Vermont Sage and Vermont State

The story of Sage cheese, or green cheese as it was called originally,
shows the several phases most cheeses have gone through, from their
simple, honest beginnings to commercialization, and sometimes back to
the real thing.

The English _Encyclopedia of Practical Cookery_ has an early Sage
recipe:

     This is a species of cream cheese made by adding sage leaves and
     greening to the milk. A very good receipt for it is given thus:
     Bruise the tops of fresh young red sage leaves with an equal
     quantity of spinach leaves and squeeze out the juice. Add this to
     the extract of rennet and stir into the milk as much as your
     taste may deem sufficient. Break the curd when it comes, salt it,
     fill the vat high with it, press for a few hours, and then turn
     the cheese every day.

_Fancy Cheese in America, lay_ Charles A. Publow, records the
commercialization of the cheese mentioned above, a century or two
later, in 1910:

     Sage cheese is another modified form of the Cheddar variety. Its
     distinguishing features are a mottled green color and a sage
     flavor. The usual method of manufacture is as follows: One-third
     of the total amount of milk is placed in a vat by itself and
     colored green by the addition of eight to twelve ounces of
     commercial sage color to each 1,000 pounds of milk. If green corn
     leaves (unavailable in England) or other substances are used for
     coloring, the amounts will vary accordingly. The milk is then
     made up by the regular Cheddar method, as is also the remaining
     two-thirds, in a separate vat. At the time of removing the whey
     the green and white curds are mixed. Some prefer, however, to mix
     the curds at the time of milling, as a more distinct color is
     secured. After milling, the sage extract flavoring is sprayed
     over the curd with an atomizer. The curd is then salted and
     pressed into the regular Cheddar shapes and sizes.

     A very satisfactory Sage cheese is made at the New York State
     College of Agriculture by simply dropping green coloring, made
     from the leaves of corn and spinach, upon the curd, after
     milling. An even green mottling is thus easily secured without
     additional labor. Sage flavoring extract is sprayed over the curd
     by an atomizer. One-half ounce of flavoring is usually sufficient
     for a hundred pounds of curd and can be secured from dairy supply
     houses.

A modern cheese authority reported on the current (1953) method:

     Instead of sage leaves, or tea prepared from them, at present the
     cheese is flavored with oil of Dalmatian wild sage because it has
     the sharpest flavor. This piny oil, thujone, is diluted with
     water, 250 parts to one, and either added to the milk or sprayed
     over the curds, one-eighth ounce for 500 quarts of milk.

In scouting around for a possible maker of the real thing today, we
wrote to Vrest Orton of Vermont, and got this reply:

     Sage cheese is one of the really indigenous and best native
     Vermont products. So far as I know, there is only one factory
     making it and that is my friend, George Crowley's. He makes a
     limited amount for my Vermont Country Store. It is the fine
     old-time full cream cheese, flavored with real sage.

     On this hangs a tale. Some years ago I couldn't get enough sage
     cheese (we never can) so I asked a Wisconsin cheesemaker if he
     would make some. Said he would but couldn't at that time--because
     the alfalfa wasn't ripe. I said, "What in hell has alfalfa got to
     do with sage cheese?" He said, "Well, we flavor the sage cheese
     with a synthetic sage flavor and then throw in some pieces of
     chopped-up alfalfa to make it look green."

     So I said to hell with that and the next time I saw George
     Crowley I told him the story and George said, "We don't use
     synthetic flavor, alfalfa or anything like that."

     "Then what do you use, George?" I inquired.

     "We use real sage."

     "Why?"

     "Well, because it's cheaper than that synthetic stuff."

The genuine Vermont Sage arrived. Here are our notes on it:

     Oh, wilderness were Paradise enow! My taste buds come to full
     flower with the Sage. There's a slight burned savor recalling
     smoked cheese, although not related in any way. Mildly resinous
     like that Near East one packed in pine, suggesting the well-saged
     dressing of a turkey. A round mouthful of luscious mellowness,
     with a bouquet--a snapping reminder to the nose. And there's just
     a soupçon of new-mown hay above the green freckles of herb to
     delight the eye and set the fancy free. So this is the _véritable
     vert_, green cheese--the moon is made of it! _Vert véritable._ A
     general favorite with everybody who ever tasted it, for
     generations of lusty crumblers.


Old-Fashioned Vermont State Store Cheese

We received from savant Vrest Orton another letter, together with some
Vermont store cheese and some crackers.

     This cheese is our regular old-fashioned store cheese--it's been
     in old country stores for generations and we have been pioneers
     in spreading the word about it. It is, of course, a natural aged
     cheese, no processing, no fussing, no fooling with it. It's made
     the same way it was back in 1870, by the old-time Colby method
     which makes a cheese which is not so dry as Cheddar and also has
     holes in it, something like Swiss. Also, it ages faster.

     Did you know that during the last part of the nineteenth century
     and part of the twentieth, Vermont was the leading cheesemaking
     state in the Union? When I was a lad, every town in Vermont had
     one or more cheese factories. Now there are only two left--not
     counting any that make process. Process isn't cheese!

     The crackers are the old-time store cracker--every Vermonter
     used to buy a big barrel once a year to set in the buttery and
     eat. A classic dish is crackers, broken up in a bowl of cold
     milk, with a hunk of Vermont cheese like this on the side. Grand
     snack, grand midnight supper, grand anything. These crackers are
     not sweet, not salt, and as such make a good base for
     anything--swell with clam chowder, also with toasted cheese....


Tillamook

It takes two pocket-sized, but thick, yellow volumes to record the
story of Oregon's great Tillamook. _The Cheddar Box_, by Dean Collins,
comes neatly boxed and bound in golden cloth stamped with a purple
title, like the rind of a real Tillamook. Volume I is entitled _Cheese
Cheddar_, and Volume II is a two-pound Cheddar cheese labeled
Tillamook and molded to fit inside its book jacket. We borrowed Volume
I from a noted _littérateur_, and never could get him to come across
with Volume II. We guessed its fate, however, from a note on the
flyleaf of the only tome available: "This is an excellent cheese, full
cream and medium sharp, and a unique set of books in which Volume II
suggests Bacon's: 'Some books are to be tasted, others to be
swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested.'"


Wisconsin Longhorn

Since we began this chapter with all-American Cheddars, it is only
fitting to end with Wisconsin Longhorn, a sort of national standard,
even though it's not nearly so fancy or high-priced as some of the
regional natives that can't approach its enormous output. It's one of
those all-purpose round cheeses that even taste round in your mouth.
We are specially partial to it.

Most Cheddars are named after their states. Yet, putting all of these
thirty-seven states together, they produce only about half as much as
Wisconsin alone.

Besides Longhorn, in Wisconsin there are a dozen regional competitors
ranging from White Twin Cheddar, to which no annatto coloring has been
added, through Green Bay cheese to Wisconsin Redskin and Martha
Washington Aged, proudly set forth by P.H. Kasper of Bear Creek, who
is said to have "won more prizes in forty years than any ten
cheesemakers put together."

To help guarantee a market for all this excellent apple-pie cheese,
the Wisconsin State Legislature made a law about it, recognizing the
truth of Eugene Field's jingle:

    Apple pie without cheese
    Is like a kiss without a squeeze.

Small matter in the Badger State when the affinity is made legal and
the couple lawfully wedded in Statute No. 160,065. It's still in
force:

     _Butter and cheese to be served._ Every person, firm or
     corporation duly licensed to operate a hotel or restaurant shall
     serve with each meal for which a charge of twenty-five cents or
     more is made, at least two-thirds of an ounce of Wisconsin butter
     and two-thirds of an ounce of Wisconsin cheese.

Besides Longhorn, Wisconsin leads in Limburger. It produces so much
Swiss that the state is sometimes called Swissconsin.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Five_

Sixty-five Sizzling Rabbits


     That nice little smoky room at the "Salutation," which is even
     now continually presenting itself to my recollection, with all
     its associated train of pipes, egg-hot, welsh-rabbits,
     metaphysics and poetry.

     Charles Lamb, IN A LETTER TO COLERIDGE


Unlike the beginning of the classical Jugged Hare recipe: "First catch
your hare!" we modern Rabbit-hunters start off with "First catch your
Cheddar!" And some of us go so far as to smuggle in formerly forbidden
_fromages_ such as Gruyère, Neufchâtel, Parmesan, and mixtures
thereof. We run the gamut of personal preferences in selecting the
Rabbit cheese itself, from old-time American, yellow or store cheese,
to Coon and Canadian-smoked, though all of it is still Cheddar, no
matter how you slice it.

Then, too, guests are made to run the gauntlet of all-American
trimmings from pin-money pickles to peanut butter, succotash and maybe
marshmallows; we add mustard, chill, curry, tabasco and sundry bottled
red devils from the grocery store, to add pep and piquance to the
traditional cayenne and black pepper. This results in Rabbits that are
out of focus, out of order and out of this world.

Among modern sins of omission, the Worcestershire sauce is left out by
braggarts who aver that they can take it or leave it. And, in these
degenerate days, when it comes to substitutions for the original beer
or stale pale ale, we find the gratings of great Cheddars wet down
with mere California sherry or even ginger ale--yet so far, thank
goodness, no Cokes. And there's tomato juice out of a can into the Rum
Turn Tiddy, and sometimes celery soup in place of milk or cream.

In view of all this, we can only look to the standard cookbooks for
salvation. These are mostly compiled by women, our thoughtful mothers,
wives and sweethearts who have saved the twin Basic Rabbits for us. If
it weren't for these Fanny Farmers, the making of a real aboriginal
Welsh Rabbit would be a lost art--lost in sporting male attempts to
improve upon the original.

The girls are still polite about the whole thing and protectively
pervert the original spelling of "Rabbit" to "Rarebit" in their
culinary guides. We have heard that once a club of ladies in high
society tried to high-pressure the publishers of Mr. Webster's
dictionary to change the old spelling in their favor. Yet there is a
lot to be said for this more genteel and appetizing rendering of the
word, for the Welsh masterpiece is, after all, a very rare bit of
cheesemongery, male or female.

Yet in dealing with "Rarebits" the distaff side seldom sets down more
than the basic Adam and Eve in a whole Paradise of Rabbits: No. 1,
the wild male type made with beer, and No. 2, the mild female made
with milk. Yet now that the chafing dish has come back to stay,
there's a flurry in the Rabbit warren and the new cooking
encyclopedias give up to a dozen variants. Actually there are easily
half a gross of valid ones in current esteem.

The two basic recipes are differentiated by the liquid ingredient, but
both the beer and the milk are used only one way--warm, or anyway at
room temperature. And again for the two, there is but one traditional
cheese--Cheddar, ripe, old or merely aged from six months onward. This
is also called American, store, sharp, Rabbit, yellow, beer, Wisconsin
Longhorn, mouse, and even rat.

The seasoned, sapid Cheddar-type, so indispensable, includes dozens of
varieties under different names, regional or commercial. These are
easily identified as sisters-under-the-rinds by all five senses:

     sight: Golden yellow and mellow to the eye. It's one of those
     round cheeses that also tastes round in the mouth.

     hearing: By thumping, a cheese-fancier, like a melon-picker,
     can tell if a Cheddar is rich, ripe and ready for the Rabbit.
     When you hear your dealer say, "It's six months old or more,"
     enough said.

     smell: A scent as fresh as that of the daisies and herbs the
     mother milk cow munched "will hang round it still." Also a slight
     beery savor.

     touch: Crumbly--a caress to the fingers.

     taste: The quintessence of this fivefold test. Just cuddle a
     crumb with your tongue and if it tickles the taste buds it's
     prime. When it melts in your mouth, that's proof it will melt in
     the pan.

Beyond all this (and in spite of the school that plumps for the No. 2
temperance alternative) we must point out that beer has a special
affinity for Cheddar. The French have clearly established this in
their names for Welsh Rabbit, _Fromage Fondue à la Bière_ and _Fondue
à l'Anglaise_.

To prepare such a cheese for the pan, each Rabbit hound may have a
preference all his own, for here the question comes up of how it melts
best. Do you shave, slice, dice, shred, mince, chop, cut, scrape or
crumble it in the fingers? This will vary according to one's
temperament and the condition of the cheese. Generally, for best
results it is coarsely grated. When it comes to making all this into a
rare bit of Rabbit there is:


The One and Only Method

Use a double boiler, or preferably a chafing dish, avoiding aluminum
and other soft metals. Heat the upper pan by simmering water in the
lower one, but don't let the water boil up or touch the top pan.

Most, but not all, Rabbits are begun by heating a bit of butter or
margarine in the pan in which one cup of roughly grated cheese,
usually sharp Cheddar, is melted and mixed with one-half cup of
liquid, added gradually. (The butter isn't necessary for a cheese that
should melt by itself.)

The two principal ingredients are melted smoothly together and kept
from curdling by stirring steadily in one direction only, over an even
heat. The spoon used should be of hard wood, sterling silver or
porcelain. Never use tin, aluminum or soft metal--the taste may come
off to taint the job.

Be sure the liquid is at room temperature, or warmer, and add it
gradually, without interrupting the stirring. Do not let it come to
the bubbling point, and never let it boil.

Add seasonings only when the cheese is melted, which will take two or
three minutes. Then continue to stir in the same direction without an
instant's letup, for maybe ten minutes or more, until the Rabbit is
smooth. The consistency and velvety smoothness depend a good deal on
whether or not an egg, or a beaten yolk, is added.

The hotter the Rabbit is served, the better. You can sizzle the top
with a salamander or other branding iron, but in any case set it forth
as nearly sizzling as possible, on toast hellishly hot, whether it's
browned or buttered on one side or both.

Give a thought to the sad case of the "little dog whose name was
Rover, and when he was dead he was dead all over." Something very
similar happens with a Rabbit that's allowed to cool down--when it's
cold it's cold all over, and you can't resuscitate it by heating.


BASIC WELSH RABBIT

 No. 1 (with beer)

2 tablespoons butter
3 cups grated old Cheddar
1/2 teaspoon English dry mustard
1/2 teaspoon salt
A dash of cayenne
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
2 egg yolks, lightly beaten with
1/2 cup light beer or ale
4 slices hot buttered toast

     Over boiling water melt butter and cheese together, stirring
     steadily with a wooden (or other tasteless) spoon in one
     direction only. Add seasonings and do not interrupt your rhythmic
     stirring, as you pour in a bit at a time of the beer-and-egg
     mixture until it's all used up.

     It may take many minutes of constant stirring to achieve the
     essential creamy thickness and then some more to slick it out as
     smooth as velvet.

     Keep it piping hot but don't let it bubble, for a boiled Rabbit
     is a spoiled Rabbit. Only unremitting stirring (and the best of
     cheese) will keep it from curdling, getting stringy or rubbery.
     Pour the Rabbit generously over crisp, freshly buttered toast
     and serve instantly on hot plates.

Usually crusts are cut off the bread before toasting, and some
aesthetes toast one side only, spreading the toasted side with cold
butter for taste contrast. Lay the toast on the hot plate, buttered
side down, and pour the Rabbit over the porous untoasted side so it
can soak in. (This is recommended in Lady Llanover's recipe, which
appears on page 52 of this book.)

Although the original bread for Rabbit toast was white, there is now
no limit in choice among whole wheat, graham, rolls, muffins, buns,
croutons and crackers, to infinity.


 No. 2 (with milk)

For a rich milk Rabbit use 1/2 cup thin cream, evaporated milk,
whole milk or buttermilk, instead of beer as in No. 1. Then, to
keep everything bland, cut down the mustard by half or leave
it out, and use paprika in place of cayenne. As in No. 1, the
use of Worcestershire sauce is optional, although our feeling is
that any spirited Rabbit would resent its being left out.

Either of these basic recipes can be made without eggs, and more
cheaply, although the beaten egg is a guarantee against stringiness.
When the egg is missing, we are sad to record that a teaspoon or so of
cornstarch generally takes its place.

Rabbiteers are of two minds about fast and slow heating and stirring,
so you'll have to adjust that to your own experience and rhythm. As a
rule, the heat is reduced when the cheese is almost melted, and speed
of stirring slows when the eggs and last ingredients go in.

Many moderns who have found that monosodium glutamate steps up the
flavor of natural cheese, put it in at the start, using one-half
teaspoon for each cup of grated Cheddar. When it comes to pepper you
are fancy-free. As both black and white pepper are now held in almost
equal esteem, you might equip your hutch with twin hand-mills to do
the grinding fresh, for this is always worth the trouble. Tabasco
sauce is little used and needs a cautious hand, but some addicts can't
leave it out any more than they can swear off the Worcestershire.

The school that plumps for malty Rabbits and the other that goes for
milky ones are equally emphatic in their choice. So let us consider
the compromise of our old friend Frederick Philip Stieff, the
Baltimore _homme de bouche_, as he set it forth for us years ago in
_10,000 Snacks_: "The idea of cooking a Rabbit with beer is an
exploded and dangerous theory. Tap your keg or open your case of ale
or beer and serve _with_, not in your Rabbit."


 The Stieff Recipe BASIC MILK RABBIT (_completely
surrounded by a lake of malt beverages_)

2 cups grated sharp cheese
3 heaping tablespoons butter
1-1/2 cups milk
4 eggs
1 heaping tablespoon mustard
2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce
Pepper, salt and paprika to taste--then add more of each.

     Grease well with butter the interior of your double boiler so
     that no hard particles of cheese will form in the mixture later
     and contribute undesirable lumps.

     Put cheese, well-grated, into the double boiler and add butter
     and milk. From this point vigorous stirring should be indulged in
     until Rabbit is ready for serving.

     Prepare a mixture of Worcestershire sauce, mustard, pepper, salt
     and paprika. These should be beaten until light and then slowly
     poured into the double boiler. Nothing now remains to be done
     except to stir and cook down to proper consistency over a fairly
     slow flame. The finale has not arrived until you can drip the
     rabbit from the spoon and spell the word _finis_ on the surface.
     Pour over two pieces of toast per plate and send anyone home who
     does not attack it at once.

     This is sufficient for six gourmets or four gourmands.

_Nota bene_: A Welsh Rabbit, to be a success, should never be of the
consistency whereby it may be used to tie up bundles, nor yet should
it bounce if inadvertently dropped on the kitchen floor.


 Lady Llanover's Toasted Welsh Rabbit

     Cut a slice of the real Welsh cheese made of sheep's and cow's
     milk; toast it at the fire on both sides, but not so much as to
     drop (melt). Toast on one side a piece of bread less than 1/4
     inch thick, to be quite crisp, and spread it very thinly with
     fresh, cold butter on the toasted side. (It must not be
     saturated.) Lay the toasted cheese upon the untoasted bread side
     and serve immediately on a very hot plate. The butter on the
     toast can, of course, be omitted. (It is more frequently eaten
     without butter.)

From this original toasting of the cheese many Englishmen still call
Welsh Rabbit "Toasted Cheese," but Lady Llanover goes on to point out
that the Toasted Rabbit of her Wales and the Melted or Stewed Buck
Rabbit of England (which has become our American standard) are as
different in the making as the regional cheeses used in them, and she
says that while doctors prescribed the toasted Welsh as salubrious for
invalids, the stewed cheese of Olde England was "only adapted to
strong digestions."

English literature rings with praise for the toasted cheese of Wales
and England. There is Christopher North's eloquent "threads of
unbeaten gold, shining like gossamer filaments (that may be pulled
from its tough and tenacious substance)."

Yet not all of the references are complimentary.

Thus Shakespeare in _King Lear_:

    Look, look a mouse!
    Peace, peace;--this piece of toasted cheese will do it.

And Sydney Smith's:

     Old friendships are destroyed by toasted cheese, and hard salted
     meat has led to suicide.

But Rhys Davis in _My Wales_ makes up for such rudenesses:

     _The Welsh Enter Heaven_

     The Lord had been complaining to St. Peter of the dearth of good
     singers in Heaven. "Yet," He said testily, "I hear excellent
     singing outside the walls. Why are not those singers here with
     me?"

     St. Peter said, "They are the Welsh. They refuse to come in; they
     say they are happy enough outside, playing with a ball and boxing
     and singing such songs as '_Suspan Fach_'"

     The Lord said, "I wish them to come in here to sing Bach and
     Mendelssohn. See that they are in before sundown."

     St. Peter went to the Welsh and gave them the commands of the
     Lord. But still they shook their heads. Harassed, St. Peter went
     to consult with St. David, who, with a smile, was reading the
     works of Caradoc Evans.

     St. David said, "Try toasted cheese. Build a fire just inside the
     gates and get a few angels to toast cheese in front of it" This
     St. Peter did. The heavenly aroma of the sizzling, browning
     cheese was wafted over the walls and, with loud shouts, a great
     concourse of the Welsh came sprinting in. When sufficient were
     inside to make up a male voice choir of a hundred, St Peter
     slammed the gates. However, it is said that these are the only
     Welsh in Heaven.

And, lest we forget, the wonderful drink that made Alice grow and grow
to the ceiling of Wonderland contained not only strawberry jam but
toasted cheese.

Then there's the frightening nursery rhyme:

    The Irishman loved usquebaugh,
      The Scot loved ale called Bluecap.
    The Welshman, he loved toasted cheese,
      And made his mouth like a mousetrap.

    The Irishman was drowned in usquebaugh,
      The Scot was drowned in ale,
    The Welshman he near swallowed a mouse
      But he pulled it out by the tail.

And, perhaps worst of all, Shakespeare, no cheese-lover, this tune in
_Merry Wives of Windsor_:

    'Tis time I were choked by a bit of toasted cheese.

An elaboration of the simple Welsh original went English with Dr.
William Maginn, the London journalist whose facile pen enlivened the
_Blackwoods Magazine_ era with _Ten Tales_:

     [Illustration] Dr. Maginn's Rabbit

     Much is to be said in favor of toasted cheese for supper. It is
     the cant to say that Welsh rabbit is heavy eating. I like it best
     in the genuine Welsh way, however--that is, the toasted bread
     buttered on both sides profusely, then a layer of cold roast beef
     with mustard and horseradish, and then, on the top of all, the
     superstratum, of Cheshire _thoroughly_ saturated, while, in the
     process of toasting, with genuine porter, black pepper, and
     shallot vinegar. I peril myself upon the assertion that this is
     not a heavy supper for a man who has been busy all day till
     dinner in reading, writing, walking or riding--who has occupied
     himself between dinner and supper in the discussion of a bottle
     or two of sound wine, or any equivalent--and who proposes to
     swallow at least three tumblers of something hot ere he resigns
     himself to the embrace of Somnus. With these provisos, I
     recommend toasted cheese for supper.

The popularity of this has come down to us in the succinct
summing-up, "Toasted cheese hath no master."

The Welsh original became simple after Dr. Maginn's supper sandwich
was served, a century and a half ago; for it was served as a savory to
sum up and help digest a dinner, in this form:


 After-Dinner Rabbit

     Remove all crusts from bread slices, toast on both sides and soak
     to saturation in hot beer. Melt thin slices of sharp old cheese
     in butter in an iron skillet, with an added spot of beer and dry
     English mustard. Stir steadily with a wooden spoon and, when
     velvety, serve a-sizzle on piping hot beer-soaked toast.

While toasted cheese undoubtedly was the Number One dairy dish of
Anglo-Saxons, stewed cheese came along to rival it in Elizabethan
London. This sophisticated, big-city dish, also called a Buck Rabbit,
was the making of Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese on Fleet Street, where Dr.
Johnson later presided. And it must have been the pick of the town
back in the days when barrooms still had sawdust on the floor, for the
learned Doctor endorsed old Omar Khayyam's love of the pub with:
"There is nothing which has been contrived by man by which so much
happiness is produced as by a good tavern." Yet he was no gourmet, as
may be judged by his likening of a succulent, golden-fried oyster to
"a baby's ear dropped in sawdust."

Perhaps it is just as well that no description of the world's first
Golden Buck has come down from him. But we don't have to look far for
on-the-spot pen pictures by other men of letters at "The Cheese," as
it was affectionately called. To a man they sang praises for that
piping hot dish of preserved and beatified milk.

Inspired by stewed cheese, Mark Lemon, the leading rhymester of
_Punch_, wrote the following poem and dedicated it to the memory of
Lovelace:

    Champagne will not a dinner make,
      Nor caviar a meal
    Men gluttonous and rich may take
      Those till they make them ill
        If I've potatoes to my chop,
        And after chop have cheese,
        Angels in Pond and Spiers's shop
        Know no such luxuries.

All that's necessary is an old-time "cheese stewer" or a reasonable
substitute. The base of this is what was once quaintly called a
"hot-water bath." This was a sort of miniature wash boiler just big
enough to fit in snugly half a dozen individual tins, made squarish
and standing high enough above the bath water to keep any of it from
getting into the stew. In these tins the cheese is melted. But since
such a tinsmith's contraption is hard to come by in these days of
fireproof cooking glass, we suggest muffin tins, ramekins or even
small cups to crowd into the bottom of your double boiler or chafing
dish. But beyond this we plump for a revival of the "cheese stewer" in
stainless steel, silver or glass.

In the ritual at "The Cheese," these dishes, brimming over, "bubbling
and blistering with the stew," followed a pudding that's still famous.
Although down the centuries the recipe has been kept secret, the
identifiable ingredients have been itemized as follows: "Tender steak,
savory oyster, seductive kidney, fascinating lark, rich gravy, ardent
pepper and delicate paste"--not to mention mushrooms. And after the
second or third helping of pudding, with a pint of stout, bitter, or
the mildest and mellowest brown October Ale in a dented pewter pot,
"the stewed Cheshire cheese."

Cheese was the one and only other course prescribed by tradition and
appetite from the time when Charles II aled and regaled Nell Gwyn at
"The Cheese," where Shakespeare is said to have sampled this "kind of
a glorified Welsh Rarebit, served piping hot in the square shallow
tins in which it is cooked and garnished with sippets of delicately
colored toast."

Among early records is this report of Addison's in _The Spectator_ of
September 25,1711:

     They yawn for a Cheshire cheese, and begin about midnight, when
     the whole company is disposed to be drowsy. He that yawns widest,
     and at the same time so naturally as to produce the most yawns
     amongst his spectators, carries home the cheese.

Only a short time later, in 1725, the proprietor of Simpson's in the
Strand inaugurated a daily guessing contest that drew crowds to his
fashionable eating and drinking place. He would set forth a huge
portion of cheese and wager champagne and cigars for the house that no
one present could correctly estimate the weight, height and girth of
it.

As late as 1795, when Boswell was accompanying Dr. Johnson to "The
Cheese," records of St. Dunstan's Club, which also met there, showed
that the current price of a Buck Rabbit was tuppence, and that this
was also the amount of the usual tip.


 Ye Original Recipe

1-1/2 ounces butter
1 cup cream
1-1/2 cups grated Cheshire cheese (more pungent, snappier, richer,
and more brightly colored than its first cousin, Cheddar)

     Heat butter and cream together, then stir in the cheese and let
     it stew.

     You dunk fingers of toast directly into your individual tin, or
     pour the Stewed Rabbit over toast and brown the top under a
     blistering salamander.

     The salamander is worth modernizing, too, so you can brand your
     own Rabbits with your monogram or the design of your own
     Rabbitry. Such a branding iron might be square, like the stew
     tin, and about the size of a piece of toast

It is notable that there is no beer or ale in this recipe, but not
lamentable, since all aboriginal cheese toasts were washed down in
tossing seas of ale, beer, porter, stout, and 'arf and 'arf.

This creamy Stewed Buck, on which the literary greats of Johnson's
time supped while they smoked their church wardens, received its
highest praise from an American newspaper woman who rhapsodized in
1891: "Then came stewed cheese, on the thin shaving of crisp, golden
toast in hot silver saucers--so hot that the cheese was the substance
of thick cream, the flavor of purple pansies and red raspberries
commingled."

This may seem a bit flowery, but in truth many fine cheeses hold a
trace of the bouquet of the flowers that have enriched the milk.
Alpine blooms and herbs haunt the Gruyère, Parmesan wafts the scent of
Parma violets, the Flower Cheese of England is perfumed with the
petals of rose, violet, marigold and jasmine.


 Oven Rabbit (FROM AN OLD RECIPE)

     Chop small 1/2 pound of cooking cheese. Put it, with a piece of
     butter the size of a walnut, in a little saucepan, and as the
     butter melts and the cheese gets warm, mash them together,

     When softened add 2 yolks of eggs, 1/2 teacupful of ale, a little
     cayenne pepper and salt. Stir with a wooden spoon one way only,
     until it is creamy, but do not let it boil, for that would spoil
     it. Place some slices of buttered toast on a dish, pour the
     Rarebit upon them, and set inside-the oven about 2 minutes before
     serving.


 Yorkshire Rabbit _(originally called Gherkin Buck,
from a pioneer recipe_)

     Put into a saucepan 1/2 pound of cheese, sprinkle with pepper
     (black, of course) to taste, pour over 1/2 teacup of ale, and
     convert the whole into a smooth, creamy mass, over the fire,
     stirring continually, for about 10 minutes.

     In 2 more minutes it should be done. (10 minutes altogether is
     the minimum.) Pour it over slices of hot toast, place a piece of
     broiled bacon on the top of each and serve as hot as possible.


 Golden Buck

     A Golden Buck is simply the Basic Welsh Rabbit with beer (No. 1)
     plus a poached egg on top. The egg, sunny side up, gave it its
     shining name a couple of centuries ago. Nowadays some chafing
     dish show-offs try to gild the Golden Buck with dashes of ginger
     and spice.


 Golden Buck II

     This is only a Golden Buck with the addition of bacon strips.


 The Venerable Yorkshire Buck

     Spread 1/2-inch slices of bread with mustard and brown in hot
     oven. Then moisten each slice with 1/2 glass of ale, lay on top a
     slice of cheese 1/4-inch thick, and 2 slices of bacon on top of
     that. Put back in oven, cook till cheese is melted and the bacon
     crisp, and serve piping hot, with tankards of cold ale.

Bacon is the thing that identifies any Yorkshire Rabbit.


 Yale College Welsh Rabbit (MORIARTY'S)

1 jigger of beer
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
1/4 teaspoon mustard
1-1/2 cups grated or shaved cheese
More beer

     Pour the jigger of beer into "a low saucepan," dash on the
     seasonings, add the cheese and stir unremittingly, moistening
     from time to time with more beer, a pony or two at a time.

     When creamy, pour over buttered toast (2 slices for this amount)
     and serve with still more beer.

There are two schools of postgraduate Rabbit-hunters: Yale, as above,
with beer both in the Rabbit and with it; and the other featured in
the Stieff Recipe, which prefers leaving it out of the Rabbit, but
taps a keg to drink with it.

The ancient age of Moriarty's campus classic is registered by the use
of pioneer black pepper in place of white, which is often used today
and is thought more sophisticated by some than the red cayenne of
Rector's Naughty Nineties Chafing Dish Rabbit, which is precisely the
same as our Basic Recipe No. 1.


 Border-hopping Bunny, or Frijole Rabbit

1-1/2 tablespoons butter
1-1/2 tablespoons chopped onion
2 tablespoons chopped pepper, green or red, or both
1-1/2 teaspoon chili powder
1 small can kidney beans, drained
1-1/2 tablespoons catsup
1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire
Salt
2 cups grated cheese

     Cook onion and pepper lightly in butter with chili powder; add
     kidney beans and seasonings and stir in the cheese until melted.

     Serve this beany Bunny peppery hot on tortillas or crackers,
     toasted and buttered.

In the whole hutch of kitchen Rabbitry the most popular modern ones
are made with tomato, a little or lots. They hop in from everywhere,
from Mexico to South Africa, and call for all kinds of quirks, down to
mixing in some dried beef, and there is even a skimpy Tomato Rabbit
for reducers, made with farmer cheese and skimmed milk.

Although the quaintly named Rum Tum Tiddy was doubtless the
great-grandpappy of all Tomato Rabbits, a richer, more buttery and
more eggy one has taken its place as the standard today. The following
is a typical recipe for this, tried and true, since it has had a
successful run through a score of the best modern cookbooks, with only
slight personal changes to keep its juice a-flowing blood-red.


 Tomato Rabbit

2 tablespoons butter
2 tablespoons flour
3/4 cup thin cream or evaporated milk
3/4 cup canned tomato pulp, rubbed through a sieve to remove seeds
A pinch of soda
3 cups grated cheese
Pinches of dry mustard, salt and cayenne
2 eggs, lightly beaten

     Blend flour in melted butter, add cream slowly, and when this
     white sauce is a little thick, stir in tomato sprinkled with
     soda. Keep stirring steadily while adding cheese and seasonings,
     and when cooked enough, stir in the eggs to make a creamy
     texture, smooth as silk. Serve on buttered whole wheat or graham
     bread for a change.

Instead of soda, some antiquated recipes call for "a tablespoon of
bicarbonate of potash."


 South African Tomato Rabbit

     This is the same as above, except that 1/2 teaspoon of sugar is
     used in place of the soda and the Rabbit is poured over baked
     pastry cut into squares and sprinkled with parsley, chopped fine,
     put in the oven and served immediately.


 Rum Tum Tiddy, Rink Tum Ditty, etc. (OLD BOSTON
STYLE)

1 tablespoon butter
1 onion, minced
1 teaspoon salt
1 big pinch of pepper
2 cups cooked tomatoes
1 tablespoon sugar
3 cups grated store cheese
1 egg, lightly beaten

     Slowly fry onion bright golden in butter, season and add tomatoes
     with sugar. Heat just under the bubbling point. Don't let it
     boil, but keep adding cheese and shaking the pan until it melts.
     Then stir in egg gently and serve very hot


 Tomato Soup Rabbit

1 can condensed tomato soup
2 cups grated cheese
1/4 teaspoon English mustard
1 egg, lightly beaten
Salt and pepper

     Heat soup, stir in cheese until melted, add mustard and egg
     slowly, season and serve hot.

This is a quickie Rum Tum Tiddy, without any onion, a poor,
housebroken version of the original. It can be called a Celery Rabbit
if you use a can of celery soup in place of the tomato.


 Onion Rum Tum Tiddy

     Prepare as in Rum Tum Tiddy, but use only 1-1/2 cups cooked
     tomatoes and add 1/2 cup of mashed boiled onions.


 Sherry Rum Tum Tiddy

1 tablespoon butter
1 small onion, minced
1 small green pepper, minced
1 can tomato soup
3/4 cup milk
3 cups grated cheese
1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
Salt and pepper
1 egg, lightly beaten
1 jigger sherry
Crackers

     Prepare as in Rum Tum Tiddy. Stir in sherry last to retain its
     flavor. Crumble crackers into a hot tureen until it's about 1/3
     full and pour the hot Rum Tum Tiddy over them.


 Blushing Bunny

     This is a sister-under-the-skin to the old-fashioned Rum Tum
     Tiddy, except that her complexion is made a little rosier with a
     lot of paprika in place of plain pepper, and the paprika cooked
     in from the start, of course.

Blushing Bunny is one of those playful English names for dishes, like
Pink Poodle, Scotch Woodcock (given below), Bubble and Squeak
_(Bubblum Squeakum_), and Toad in the Hole.


 Scotch Woodcock

     Another variant of Rum Tum Tiddy. Make your Rum Tum Tiddy, but
     before finishing up with the beaten egg, stir in 2 heaping
     tablespoons of anchovy paste and prepare the buttered toast by
     laying on slices of hard-cooked eggs.


 American Woodchuck

1-1/2 cups tomato purée
2 cups grated cheese
1 egg, lightly beaten
Cayenne
1 tablespoon brown sugar
Salt and pepper

     Heat the tomato and stir in the cheese. When partly melted stir
     in the egg and, when almost cooked, add seasonings without ever
     interrupting the stirring. Pour over hot toasted crackers or
     bread.

No doubt this all-American Tomato Rabbit with brown sugar was named
after the native woodchuck, in playful imitation of the Scotch
Woodcock above. It's the only Rabbit we know that's sweetened with
brown sugar.


 Running Rabbit (_as served at the Waldorf-Astoria,
First Annual Cheeselers Field Day, November 12,1937_)

     Cut finest old American cheese in very small pieces and melt in
     saucepan with a little good beer. Season and add Worcestershire
     sauce. Serve instantly with freshly made toast.

This running cony can be poured over toast like any other Rabbit, or
over crushed crackers in a hot tureen, as in Sherry Rum Tum Tiddy, or
served like Fondue, in the original cooking bowl or pan, with the
spoon kept moving in it in one direction only and the Rabbit following
the spoon, like a greyhound following the stuffed rabbit at the dog
races.


 Mexican Chilaly

1 tablespoon butter
3 tablespoons chopped green pepper 1-1/2 tablespoons chopped onion
1 cup chopped and drained canned tomatoes, without seeds
2-1/2 cups grated cheese
3/4 teaspoon salt
Dash of cayenne
1 egg, lightly beaten
2 tablespoons canned tomato juice
Water cress

     Cook pepper and onion lightly in butter, add tomato pulp and cook
     5 minutes before putting over boiling water and stirring steadily
     as you add cheese and seasonings. Moisten the egg with the tomato
     juice and stir in until the Rabbit is thick and velvety.

     Serve on toast and dress with water cress.

This popular modern Rabbit seems to be a twin to Rum Tum Tiddy in
spite of the centuries' difference in age.


 Fluffy, Eggy Rabbit

     Stir up a Chilaly as above, but use 2 well-beaten eggs to make it
     more fluffy, and leave out the watercress. Serve it hot over cold
     slices of hard-cooked eggs crowded flat on hot buttered toast, to
     make it extra eggy.


 Grilled Tomato Rabbit

     Slice big, red, juicy tomatoes 1/2-inch thick, season with salt,
     pepper and plenty of brown sugar. Dot both sides with all the
     butter that won't slip off.

     Heat in moderate oven, and when almost cooked, remove and broil
     on both sides. Put on hot plates in place of the usual toast and
     pour the Rabbit over them. (The Rabbit is made according to
     either Basic Recipe No. 1 or No. 2.)

     Slices of crisp bacon on top of the tomato slices and a touch of
     horseradish help.


 Grilled Tomato and Onion Rabbit

     Slice 1/4-inch thick an equal number of tomato and onion rings.
     Season with salt, pepper, brown sugar and dots of butter. Heat in
     moderate oven, and when almost cooked remove and broil lightly.

     On hot plates lay first the onion rings, top with the tomato ones
     and pour the Rabbit over, as in the plain Grilled Tomato recipe
     above.

For another onion-flavored Rabbit see Celery and Onion Rabbit.


 The Devil's Own (_a fresh tomato variant_)

2 tablespoons butter
1 large peeled tomato in 4 thick slices
2-1/2 cups grated cheese
1/4 teaspoon English mustard
A pinch of cayenne
A dash of tabasco sauce
2 tablespoons chili sauce
1/2 cup ale or beer
1 egg, lightly beaten

     Sauté tomato slices lightly on both sides in 1 tablespoon butter.
     Keep warm on hot platter while you make the toast and a Basic
     Rabbit, pepped up by the extra-hot seasonings listed above. Put
     hot tomato slices on hot toast on hot plates; pour the hot
     mixture over.


 Dried Beef or Chipped Beef Rabbit

1 tablespoon butter
1 cup canned tomato, drained, chopped and de-seeded
1/4 pound dried beef, shredded
2 eggs, lightly beaten
1/4 teaspoon pepper
2 cups grated cheese

     Heat tomato in butter, add beef and eggs, stir until mixed well,
     then sprinkle with pepper, stir in the grated cheese until smooth
     and creamy. Serve on toast.

No salt is needed on this jerked steer meat that is called both dried
beef and chipped beef on this side of the border, _tasajo_ on the
other side, and _xarque_ when you get all the way down to Brazil.


 Kansas Jack Rabbit

1 cup milk
3 tablespoons butter
3 tablespoons flour
2 cups grated cheese
1 cup cream-style corn
Salt and pepper

     Make a white sauce of milk, butter and flour and stir in cheese
     steadily and gradually until melted. Add corn and season to
     taste. Serve on hot buttered toast.

Kansas has plenty of the makings for this, yet the dish must have been
easier to make on Baron Münchhausen's "Island of Cheese," where the
cornstalks produced loaves of bread, ready-made, instead of ears, and
were no doubt crossed with long-eared jacks to produce Corn Rabbits
quite as miraculous.

After tomatoes, in popularity, come onions and then green peppers or
canned pimientos as vegetable ingredients in modern, Americanized
Rabbits. And after that, corn, as in the following recipe which
appeals to all Latin-Americans from Mexico to Chile because it has
everything.


 Latin-American Corn Rabbit

2 tablespoons butter
1 green pepper, chopped
1 large onion, chopped
1/2 cup condensed tomato soup
3 cups grated cheese
1 teaspoon salt
1/4 teaspoon black pepper
1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
1 cup canned corn
1 egg, lightly beaten

     Fry pepper and onion 5 minutes in butter; add soup, cover and
     cook 5 minutes more. Put over boiling water; add cheese with
     seasonings and stir steadily, slowly adding the corn, and when
     thoroughly blended and creamy, moisten the egg with a little of
     the liquid, stir in until thickened and then pour over hot toast
     or crackers.


 Mushroom-Tomato Rabbit

     In one pan commence frying in butter 1 cup of sliced fresh
     mushrooms, and in another make a Rabbit by melting over boiling
     water 2 cups of grated cheese with 1/2 teaspoon salt and 1/2
     teaspoon paprika. Stir steadily and, when partially melted, stir
     in a can of condensed tomato soup, previously heated. Then add
     the fried mushrooms slowly, stir until creamy and pour over hot
     toast or crackers.


 Celery and Onion Rabbit

1/2 cup chopped hearts of celery
1 small onion, chopped
1 tablespoon butter
1-1/2 cups grated sharp cheese
Salt and pepper

     In a separate pan boil celery and onion until tender. Meanwhile,
     melt cheese with butter and seasonings and stir steadily. When
     nearly done stir the celery and onion in gradually, until smooth
     and creamy.

     Pour over buttered toast and brown with a salamander or under the
     grill.


 Asparagus Rabbit

     Make as above, substituting a cupful of tender sliced asparagus
     tops for the celery and onion.


 Oyster Rabbit

2 dozen oysters and their liquor
1 teaspoon butter
2 eggs, lightly beaten
1 large pinch of salt
1 small pinch of cayenne
3 cups grated cheese

     Heat oysters until edges curl and put aside to keep warm while
     you proceed to stir up a Rabbit. When cheese is melted add the
     eggs with some of the oyster liquor and keep stirring. When the
     Rabbit has thickened to a smooth cream, drop in the warm oysters
     to heat a little more, and serve on hot buttered toast.


 Sea-food Rabbits

     _(crab, lobster, shrimp, scallops, clams, mussels, abalone,
     squid, octopi; anything that swims in the sea or crawls on the
     bottom of the ocean)_

     Shred, flake or mince a cupful of any freshly cooked or canned
     sea food and save some of the liquor, if any. Make according to
     Oyster Rabbit recipe above.

     Instead of using only one kind of sea food, try several, mixed
     according to taste. Spike this succulent Sea Rabbit with
     horseradish or a dollop of sherry, for a change.


 "Bouquet of the Sea" Rabbit

     The seafaring Portuguese set the style for this lush bouquet of
     as many different kinds of cooked fish (tuna, cod, salmon, etc.)
     as can be sardined together in the whirlpool of melted cheese in
     the chafing dish. They also accent it with tidbits of sea food as
     above.


 Other Fish Rabbit, Fresh or Dried

     Any cooked fresh fish, flaked or shredded, from the alewife to
     the whale, or cooked dried herring, finnan haddie, mackerel, cod,
     and so on, can be stirred in to make a basic Rabbit more tasty.
     Happy combinations are hit upon in mixing leftovers of several
     kinds by the cupful. So the odd old cookbook direction, "Add a
     cup of fish," takes on new meaning.


 Grilled Sardine Rabbit

     Make a Basic Rabbit and pour it over sardines, skinned, boned,
     halved and grilled, on buttered toast.

     Similarly cooked fillets of any small fish will make as succulent
     a grilled Rabbit.


 Roe Rabbits

     Slice cooked roe of shad or toothsome eggs of other fish, grill
     on toast, butter well and pour a Basic Rabbit over. Although shad
     roe is esteemed the finest, there are many other sapid ones of
     salmon, herring, flounder, cod, etc.


 Plain Sardine Rabbit

     Make Basic Rabbit with only 2 cups of cheese, and in place of the
     egg yolks and beer, stir in a large tin of sardines, skinned,
     boned and flaked.


 Anchovy Rabbit

     Make Basic Rabbit, add 1 tablespoon of imported East Indian
     chutney with the egg yolks and beer at the finish, spread toast
     thickly with anchovy paste and butter, and pour the Rabbit over.


 Smoked sturgeon, whiting, eel, smoked salmon, and the like

     Lay cold slices or flakes of any fine smoked fish (and all of
     them are fine) on hot buttered toast and pour a Basic Rabbit over
     the fish.

     The best combination we ever tasted is made by laying a thin
     slice of smoked salmon over a thick one of smoked sturgeon.


 Smoked Cheddar Rabbit

     With or without smoked fish, Rabbit-hunters whose palates crave
     the savor of a wisp of smoke go for a Basic Rabbit made with
     smoked Cheddar in place of the usual aged, but unsmoked, Cheddar.
     We use a two-year-old that Phil Alpert, Mr. Cheese himself,
     brings down from Canada and has specially smoked in the same
     savory room where sturgeon is getting the works. So his Cheddar
     absorbs the de luxe flavor of six-dollar-per-pound sturgeon and
     is sold for a fraction of that.

     And just in case you are fishing around for something extra
     special, serve this smoky Rabbit on oven-browned Bombay ducks,
     those crunchy flat toasts of East Indian fish.

     Or go Oriental by accompanying this with cups of smoky Lapsang
     Soochong China tea.


 Crumby Rabbit

1 tablespoon butter
2 cups grated cheese
1 cup stale bread crumbs
  soaked with
1 cup milk
1 egg, lightly beaten
Salt
Cayenne
Toasted crackers

     Melt cheese in butter, stir in the soaked crumbs and seasonings.
     When cooked smooth and creamy, stir in the egg to thicken the
     mixture and serve on toasted crackers, dry or buttered, for
     contrast with the bread.

     Some Rabbiteers monkey with this, lacing it with half a cup of
     catsup, making a sort of pink baboon out of what should be a
     white monkey.

     There is a cult for Crumby Rabbits variations on which extend all
     the way to a deep casserole dish called Baked Rabbit and
     consisting of alternate layers of stale bread crumbs and
     grated-cheese crumbs. This illegitimate three-layer Rabbit is
     moistened with eggs beaten up with milk, and seasoned with salt
     and paprika.


 Crumby Tomato Rabbit

2 teaspoons butter
2 cups grated cheese
1/2 cup soft bread crumbs
1 cup tomato soup
Salt and pepper
1 egg, lightly beaten

     Melt cheese in butter, moisten bread crumbs with the tomato soup
     and stir in; season, add egg and keep stirring until velvety.
     Serve on toasted crackers, as a contrast to the bread crumbs.


 Gherkin or Irish Rabbit

2 tablespoons butter
2 cups grated cheese
1/2 cup milk (or beer)
A dash of vinegar
1/2 teaspoon mustard
Salt and pepper
1/2 cup chopped gherkin pickles

     Melt cheese in butter, steadily stir in liquid and seasonings.
     Keep stirring until smooth, then add the pickles and serve.

This may have been called Irish after the green of the pickle.


 Dutch Rabbit

     Melt thin slices of any good cooking cheese in a heavy skillet
     with a little butter, prepared mustard, and a splash of beer.

     Have ready some slices of toast soaked in hot beer or ale and
     pour the Rabbit over them.

     The temperance version of this substitutes milk for beer and
     delicately soaks the toast in hot water instead.

Proof that there is no Anglo-Saxon influence here lies in the use of
prepared mustard. The English, who still do a lot of things the hard
way, mix their biting dry mustard fresh with water before every meal,
while the Germans and French bottle theirs, as we do.


 Pumpernickel Rabbit

     This German deviation is made exactly the same as the Dutch
     Rabbit above, but its ingredients are the opposite in color.
     Black bread (pumpernickel) slices are soaked in heated dark beer
     (porter or stout) and the yellow cheese melted in the skillet is
     also stirred up with brunette beer.

Since beer is a kind of liquid bread, it is natural for the two to
commingle in Rabbits whether they are blond Dutch or black
pumpernickel. And since cheese is only solid milk, and the Cheddar is
noted for its beery smell, there is further affinity here. An old
English proverb sums it up neatly: "Bread and cheese are the two
targets against death."

By the way, the word pumpernickel is said to have been coined when
Napoleon tasted his first black bread in Germany. Contemptuously he
spat it out with: "This would be good for my horse, Nicole." "_Bon
pour Nicole_" in French.


 Gruyère Welsh Rabbit _au gratin_

     Cut crusts from a half-dozen slices of bread. Toast them lightly,
     lay in a roasting pan and top each with a matching slice of
     imported Gruyère 3/8-inch thick. Pepper to taste and cover with
     bread crumbs. Put in oven 10 minutes and rush to the ultimate
     consumer.

To our American ears anything _au gratin_ suggests "with cheese," so
this Rabbit _au gratin_ may sound redundant. To a Frenchman, however,
it means a dish covered with bread crumbs.


 Swiss Cheese Rabbit

1/2 cup white wine, preferably Neufchâtel
1/2 cup grated Gruyère
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
1/2 saltspoon paprika
2 egg yolks

     Stir wine and seasonings together with the cheese until it melts,
     then thicken with the egg yolks, stirring at least 3 more minutes
     until smooth.


 Sherry Rabbit

3 cups grated cheese
1/2 cup cream or evaporated milk
1/2 cup sherry
1/4 teaspoon English mustard
1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
A dash of paprika

     Heat cheese over hot water, with or without a bit of butter, and
     when it begins to melt, stir in the cream. Keep stirring until
     almost all of the cheese is melted, then add sherry. When smooth
     and creamy, stir in the mustard and Worcestershire sauce, and
     after pouring over buttered toast dash with paprika for color.


 Spanish Sherry Rabbit

3 tablespoons butter
3 tablespoons flour
1 bouillon cube, mashed
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon dry mustard
1-1/2 cups milk
1-1/2 cups grated cheese
1 jigger sherry

     Make a smooth paste of butter, flour, bouillon cube and
     seasonings, and add milk slowly. When well-heated stir in the
     cheese gradually. Continue stirring at least 10 minutes, and when
     well-blended stir in the sherry and serve on hot, buttered toast.


 Pink Poodle

2 tablespoons butter
1 tablespoon chopped onion
1 tablespoon flour
1 jigger California claret
1 cup cream of tomato soup
A pinch of soda
1/2 teaspoon dry mustard
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon paprika
A dash of powdered cloves
3 cups grated cheese
1 egg, lightly beaten

     Cook onion in butter until light golden, then blend in flour,
     wine and soup with the soda and all seasonings. Stir in cheese
     slowly until melted and finish off by thickening with the egg and
     stirring until smooth and velvety. Serve on crisp, buttered toast
     with a dry red wine.

Although wine Rabbits, red or white, are as unusual as Swiss ones with
Gruyère in place of Cheddar, wine is commonly drunk with anything from
a Golden Buck to a Blushing Bunny. But for most of us, a deep draught
of beer or ale goes best with an even deeper draught of the mellow
scent of a Cheddar golden-yellow.


 Savory Eggy Dry Rabbit

1/8 pound butter
2 cups grated Gruyère
4 eggs, well-beaten
Salt
Pepper
Mustard

     Melt butter and cheese together with the beaten eggs, stirring
     steadily with wooden spoon until soft and smooth. Season and pour
     over dry toast.

This "dry" Rabbit, in which the volume of the eggs makes up for any
lacking liquid, is still served as a savory after the sweets to finish
a fine meal in some old-fashioned English homes and hostelries.


 Cream Cheese Rabbit

     This Rabbit, made with a package of cream cheese, is more
     scrambled hen fruit than Rabbit food, for you simply scramble a
     half-dozen eggs with butter, milk, salt, pepper and cayenne, and
     just before the finish work in the cheese until smooth and serve
     on crackers--water crackers for a change.


 Reducing Rarebit (Tomato Rarebit)[A]

YIELD: 2 servings. 235 calories per serving.

1/2 pound farmer cheese
2 eggs
1 level tablespoon powdered milk
1 level teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon gelatin or agar powder
4 egg tomatoes, quartered, or
2 tomatoes, quartered
1 teaspoon caraway seeds
1/4 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon parsley flakes
1/2 head lettuce and/or 1 cucumber
1/4 cup wine vinegar
Salt and pepper to taste

[Footnote A: (from _The Low-Calory Cookbook_ by Bernard Koten,
published by Random House)]

     Fill bottom of double boiler with water to 3/4 mark. Sprinkle
     salt in upper part of double boiler. Boil over medium flame. When
     upper part is hot, put in cheese, powdered milk, baking powder,
     gelatin, caraway seeds and pepper and garlic powder to taste.
     Mix. Break eggs into this mixture, cook over low flame,
     continually stirring. Add tomatoes when mixture bubbles and
     continue cooking and stirring until tomatoes have been cooked
     soft. Remove to lettuce and/or cucumber (sliced thin) which has
     been slightly marinated in wine vinegar and sprinkle the parsley
     flakes over the top of the mixture.


 Curry Rabbit

1 tablespoon cornstarch
2 cups milk
2-1/2 cups grated cheese
1 tablespoon minced chives
2 green onions, minced
2 shallots, minced
1/4 teaspoon imported curry powder
1 tablespoon chutney sauce

     Dissolve cornstarch in a little of the milk and scald the rest
     over hot water. Thicken with cornstarch mixture and stir in the
     cheese, chives, onions, shallots, curry and chutney while
     wooden-spooning steadily until smooth and sizzling enough to pour
     over buttered toast.

People who can't let well enough alone put cornstarch in Rabbits, just
as they add soda to spoil the cooking of vegetables.


 Ginger Ale Rabbit

     Simply substitute ginger ale for the real thing in the No. 1
     Rabbit of all time.


 Buttermilk Rabbit

     Substitute buttermilk for plain milk in the No. 2 Rabbit. To be
     consistent, use fresh-cured Buttermilk Cheese, instead of the
     usual Cheddar of fresh cow's milk. This is milder.


 Eggnog Rabbit

2 tablespoons sweet butter
2 cups grated mellow Cheddar
1-1/3 cups eggnog
Dashes of spice to taste.

     After melting the cheese in butter, stir in the eggnog and keep
     stirring until smooth and thickened. Season or not, depending on
     taste and the quality of eggnog employed.

Ever since the innovation of bottled eggnogs fresh from the milkman in
holiday season, such supremely creamy and flavorful Rabbits have been
multiplying as fast as guinea pigs.


 All-American Succotash Rabbit

1 cup milk
3 tablespoons butter
3 tablespoons flour
3 cups grated cheese
1 cup creamed succotash, strained
Salt and pepper

     Make a white sauce of milk, butter and flour and stir in the
     cheese steadily and gradually until melted. Add the creamed
     succotash and season to taste.

     Serve on toasted, buttered corn bread.


 Danish Rabbit

1 quart warm milk
2 cups grated cheese

     Stir together to boiling point and pour over piping-hot toast in
     heated bowl. This is an esteemed breakfast dish in north Denmark.

     As in all Rabbits, more or less cheese may be used, to taste.

 Easy English Rabbit

     Soak bread slices in hot beer. Melt thin slices of cheese with
     butter in iron frying pan, stir in a few spoonfuls of beer and a
     bit of prepared mustard. When smoothly melted, pour over the
     piping-hot, beer-soaked toast.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Six_

The Fondue


There is a conspiracy among the dictionary makers to take the heart
out of the Fondue. Webster makes it seem no better than a collapsed
soufflé, with his definition:

     Fondue. Also, erroneously, _fondu_. A dish made of melted
     cheese, butter, eggs, and, often, milk and bread crumbs.

Thorndike-Barnhart further demotes this dish, that for centuries has
been one of the world's greatest, to "a combination of melted cheese,
eggs and butter" and explains that the name comes from the French
_fondre_, meaning melt. The latest snub is delivered by the up-to-date
_Cook's Quiz_ compiled by TV culinary experts:

     A baked dish with eggs, cheese, butter, milk and bread crumbs.

A baked dish, indeed! Yet the Fondue has added to the gaiety and
inebriety of nations, if not of dictionaries. It has commanded the
respect of the culinary great. Savarin, Boulestin, André Simon, all
have hailed its heavenly consistency, all have been regaled with its
creamy, nay velvety, smoothness.

A touch of garlic, a dash of kirsch, fresh ground black pepper,
nutmeg, black pearl truffles of Bugey, red cayenne pepper, the
luscious gravy of roast turkey--such little matters help to make an
authentic dunking Fondue, not a baked Fondue, mind you. Jean-Anthelme
Brillat-Savarin a century and a half ago brought the original
"receipt" with him and spread it around with characteristic generosity
during the two years of his exile in New York after the French
Revolution. In his monumental _Physiologie du Goût_ he records an
incident that occurred in 1795:

     Whilst passing through Boston ... I taught the restaurant-keeper
     Julien to make a _Fondue_, or eggs cooked with cheese. This dish,
     a novelty to the Americans, became so much the rage, that he
     (Julien) felt himself obliged, by way of thanks, to send me to
     New York the rump of one of those pretty little roebucks that are
     brought from Canada in winter, and which was declared exquisite
     by the chosen committee whom I convoked for the occasion.

As the great French gourmet, Savarin was born on the Swiss border (at
Belley, in the fertile Province of Bugey, where Gertrude Stein later
had a summer home), he no doubt ate Gruyère three times a day, as is
the custom in Switzerland and adjacent parts. He sets down the recipe
just as he got it from its Swiss source, the papers of Monsieur
Trolliet, in the neighboring Canton of Berne:

     Take as many eggs as you wish to use, according to the number of
     your guests. Then take a lump of good Gruyère cheese, weighing
     about a third of the eggs, and a nut of butter about half the
     weight of the cheese. (Since today's eggs in America weigh about
     1-1/2 ounces apiece, if you start the Fondue with 8. your lump
     of good Gruyère would come to 1/4 pound and your butter to 1/8
     pound.)

     Break and beat the eggs well in a flat pan, then add the butter
     and the cheese, grated or cut in small pieces.

     Place the pan on a good fire and stir with a wooden spoon until
     the mixture is fairly thick and soft; put in a little or no salt,
     according to the age of the cheese, and a good deal of pepper,
     for this is one of the special attributes of this ancient dish.

     Let it be placed on the table in a hot dish, and if some of the
     best wines be produced, and the bottle passed quite freely, a
     marvelous effect will be beheld.

This has long been quoted as the proper way to make the national dish
of Switzerland. Savarin tells of hearing oldsters in his district
laugh over the Bishop of Belley eating his Fondue with a spoon instead
of the traditional fork, in the first decade of the 1700's. He tells,
too, of a Fondue party he threw for a couple of his septuagenarian
cousins in Paris "about the year 1801."

The party was the result of much friendly taunting of the master: "By
Jove, Jean, you have been bragging for such a long time about your
Fondues, you have continually made our mouths water. It is high time
to put a stop to all this. We will come and breakfast with you some
day and see what sort of thing this dish is."

Savarin invited them for ten o'clock next day, started them off with
the table laid on a "snow white cloth, and in each one's place two
dozen oysters with a bright golden lemon. At each end of the table
stood a bottle of sauterne, carefully wiped, excepting the cork, which
showed distinctly that it had been in the cellar for a long while....
After the oysters, which were quite fresh, came some broiled kidneys,
a _terrine_ of _foie gras_, a pie with truffles, and finally the
Fondue. The different ingredients had all been assembled in a stewpan,
which was placed on the table over a chafing dish, heated with spirits
of wine.

"Then," Savarin is quoted, "I commenced operations on the field of
battle, and my cousins did not lose a single one of my movements.
They were loud in the praise of this preparation, and asked me to let
them have the receipt, which I promised them...."

This Fondue breakfast party that gave the nineteenth century such a
good start was polished off with "fruits in season and sweets, a cup
of genuine mocha, ... and finally two sorts of liqueurs, one a spirit
for cleansing, and the other an oil for softening."

This primitive Swiss Cheese Fondue is now prepared more elaborately in
what is called:


 Neufchâtel Style

2-1/2 cups grated imported Swiss
1-1/2 tablespoons flour
1 clove of garlic
1 cup dry white wine
Crusty French "flute" or hard rolls cut into big mouthfuls, handy
    for dunking
1 jigger kirsch
Salt
Pepper
Nutmeg

     The cheese should be shredded or grated coarsely and mixed well
     with the flour. Use a chafing dish for cooking and a small heated
     casserole for serving. Hub the bottom and sides of the blazer
     well with garlic, pour in the wine and heat to bubbling, just
     under boiling. Add cheese slowly, half a cup at a time, and stir
     steadily in one direction only, as in making Welsh Rabbit. Use a
     silver fork. Season with very little salt, always depending on
     how salty the cheese is, but use plenty of black pepper, freshly
     ground, and a touch of nutmeg. Then pour in the kirsch, stir
     steadily and invite guests to dunk their forked bread in the dish
     or in a smaller preheated casserole over a low electric or
     alcohol burner on the dining table. The trick is to keep the
     bubbling melted cheese in rhythmic motion with the fork, both up
     and down and around and around.

The dunkers stab the hunks of crusty French bread through the soft
part to secure a firm hold in the crust, for if your bread comes off
in dunking you pay a forfeit, often a bottle of wine.

The dunking is done as rhythmically as the stirring, guests taking
regular turns at twirling the fork to keep the cheese swirling. When
this "chafing dish cheese custard," as it has been called in England,
is ready for eating, each in turn thrusts in his fork, sops up a
mouthful with the bread for a sponge and gives the Fondue a final
stir, to keep it always moving in the same direction. All the while
the heat beneath the dish keeps it gently bubbling.

Such a Neufchâtel party was a favorite of King Edward VII, especially
when he was stepping out as the Prince of Wales. He was as fond of
Fondue as most of the great gourmets of his day and preferred it to
Welsh Rabbit, perhaps because of the wine and kirsch that went into
it.

At such a party a little heated wine is added if the Fondue gets too
thick. When finally it has cooked down to a crust in the bottom of the
dish, this is forked out by the host and divided among the guests as a
very special dividend.

Any dry white wine will serve in a pinch, and the Switzerland Cheese
Association, in broadcasting this classical recipe, points out that
any dry rum, slivovitz, or brandy, including applejack, will be a
valid substitute for the kirsch. To us, applejack seems specially
suited, when we stop to consider our native taste that has married
apple pie to cheese since pioneer times.

In culinary usage fondue means "melting to an edible consistency" and
this, of course, doesn't refer to cheese alone, although we use it
chiefly for that.

In France Fondue is also the common name for a simple dish of eggs
scrambled with grated cheese and butter and served very hot on toasted
bread, or filled into fancy paper cases, quickly browned on top and
served at once. The reason for this is that all baked Fondues fall as
easily and as far as Soufflés, although the latter are more noted for
this failing. There is a similarity in the soft fluffiness of both,
although the Fondues are always more moist. For there is a stiff,
stuffed-shirt buildup around any Soufflé, suggesting a dressy dinner,
while Fondue started as a self-service dunking bowl.

Our modern tendency is to try to make over the original French Fondue
on the Welsh Rabbit model--to turn it into a sort of French Rabbit.
Although we know that both Gruyère and Emmentaler are what we call
Swiss and that it is impossible in America to duplicate the rich
Alpine flavor given by the mountain herbs, we are inclined to try all
sorts of domestic cheeses and mixtures thereof. But it's best to stick
to Savarin's "lump of Gruyère" just as the neighboring French and
Italians do. It is interesting to note that this Swiss Alpine cooking
has become so international that it is credited to Italy in the
following description we reprint from _When Madame Cooks_, by an
Englishman, Eric Weir:


 Fondue à l'Italienne

     This is one of those egg dishes that makes one feel really
     grateful to hens. From its name it originated probably in Italy,
     but it has crossed the Alps. I have often met it in France, but
     only once in Italy.

     First of all, make a very stiff white sauce with butter, flour
     and milk. The sauce should be stiff enough to allow the wooden
     spoon to stand upright or almost.

     Off the fire, add yolks of eggs and 4 ounces of grated Gruyère
     cheese. Mix this in well with the white sauce and season with
     salt, pepper and some grated nutmeg. Beat whites of egg firm. Add
     the whites to the preparation, stir in, and pour into a pudding
     basin.

     Take a large saucepan and fill half full of water. Bring to a
     boil, and then place the pudding basin so that the top of the
     basin is well out of the water. Allow to boil gently for 1-1/2 to
     2 hours. Renew the boiling water from time to time, as it
     evaporates, and take care that the water, in boiling, does not
     bubble over the mixture.

     Test with a knife, as for a cake, to see if it is cooked. When
     the knife comes out clean, take the basin out of the water and
     turn the Fondue out on a dish. It should be fairly firm and keep
     the shape of the basin.

     Sprinkle with some finely chopped ham and serve hot.

The imported Swiss sometimes is cubed instead of grated, then
marinated for four or five hours in dry white wine, before being
melted and liquored with the schnapps. This can be pleasantly adopted
here in:


 All-American Fondue

1 pound imported Swiss cheese, cubed
3/4 cup scuppernong or other American white wine
1-1/2 jiggers applejack

     After marinating the Swiss cubes in the wine, simply melt
     together over hot water, stir until soft and creamy, add the
     applejack and dunk with fingers of toast or your own to a chorus
     of "All Bound Round with a Woolen String."

     Of course, this can be treated as a mere vinous Welsh Rabbit and
     poured over toast, to be accompanied by beer. But wine is the
     thing, for the French Fondue is to dry wine what the Rabbit is to
     stale ale or fresh beer.

We say French instead of Swiss because the French took over the dish
so eagerly, together with the great Gruyère that makes it distinctive.
They internationalized it, sent it around the world with bouillabaisse
and onion soup, that celestial _soupe à l'oignon_ on which snowy
showers of grated Gruyère descend.

To put the Welsh Rabbit in its place they called it Fondue à
l'Anglaise, which also points up the twinlike relationship of the
world's two favorite dishes of melted cheese. But to differentiate and
show they are not identical twins, the No. 1 dish remained Fromage
Fondue while the second was baptized Fromage Fondue à la Bière.

Beginning with Savarin the French whisked up more rapturous,
rhapsodic writing about Gruyère and its offspring, the Fondue,
together with the puffed Soufflé, than about any other imported cheese
except Parmesan.

Parmesan and Gruyère were praised as the two greatest culinary
cheeses. A variant Fondue was made of the Italian cheese.


 Parmesan Fondue

3 tablespoons butter
1 cup grated Parmesan cheese
4 eggs, lightly beaten
Salt
Pepper

     Over boiling water melt butter and cheese slowly, stir in the
     eggs, season to taste and stir steadily in one direction only,
     until smooth.

     Pour over fingers of buttered toast. Or spoon it up, as the
     ancients did, before there were any forks. It's beaten with a
     fork but eaten catch-as-catch-can, like chicken-in-the-rough.


 Sapsago Swiss Fondue

2 tablespoons butter
2 tablespoons flour
1/2 teaspoon salt
1-1/2 cups milk
2-1/2 cups shredded Swiss cheese
2-1/2 tablespoons grated Sapsago
1/2 cup dry white wine
Pepper, black and red, freshly ground
Fingers of toast

     Over boiling water stir the first four ingredients into a smooth,
     fairly thick cream sauce. Then stir in Swiss cheese until well
     melted. After that add the Sapsago, finely grated, and wine in
     small splashes. Stir steadily, in one direction only, until
     velvety. Season sharply with the contrasting peppers and serve
     over fingers of toast.

This is also nice when served bubbling in individual, preheated
pastry shells, casseroles or ramekins, although this way most of the
fun of the dunking party is left out. To make up for it, however,
cooked slices of mushrooms are sometimes added.

At the Cheese Cellar in the New York World's Fair Swiss Pavilion,
where a continual dunking party was in progress, thousands of amateurs
learned such basic things as not to overcook the Fondue lest it become
stringy, and the protocol of dunking in turn and keeping the mass in
continual motion until the next on the Fondue line dips in his cube of
bread. The success of the dish depends on making it quickly, keeping
it gently a-bubble and never letting it stand still for a split
second.

The Swiss, who consume three or four times as much cheese per capita
as we, and almost twice as much as the French, are willing to share
Fondue honors with the French Alpine province of Savoy, a natural
cheese cellar with almost two dozen distinctive types of its very own,
such as Fat cheese, also called Death's Head; La Grande Bornand, a
luscious half-dried sheep's milker; Chevrotins, small, dry goat milk
cheeses; and Le Vacherin. The latter, made in both Savoy and
Switzerland, boasts two interesting variants:

     1. _Vacherin Fondue or Spiced Fondue:_ Made about the same as
     Emmentaler, ripened to sharp age, and then melted, spices added
     and the cheese re-formed. It is also called Spiced Fondue and
     sells for about two dollars a pound. Named Fondue from being
     melted, though it's really recooked,

     2. _Vacherin à la Main:_ This is a curiosity in cheeses,
     resembling a cold, uncooked Fondue. Made of cow's milk, it is
     round, a foot in diameter and half a foot high. It is salted and
     aged until the rind is hard and the inside more runny than the
     ripest Camembert, so it can be eaten with a spoon (like the
     cooked Fondue) as well as spread on bread. The local name for it
     is _Tome de Montagne_.

Here is a good assortment of Fondues:


 Vacherin-Fribourg Fondue

2 tablespoons butter
1 clove garlic, crushed
2 cups shredded Vacherin cheese
2 tablespoons hot water

     This authentic quickie is started by cooking the garlic in butter
     until the butter is melted. Then remove garlic and reduce heat.
     Add the soft cheese and stir with silver fork until smooth and
     velvety. Add the water in little splashes, stirring constantly in
     one direction. Dunk! (In this melted Swiss a little water takes
     the place of a lot of wine.)


 La Fondue Comtois

     This regional specialty of Franche-Comté is made with white wine.
     Sauterne, Chablis, Riesling or any Rhenish type will serve
     splendidly. Also use butter, grated Gruyère, beaten eggs and that
     touch of garlic.


 Chives Fondue

3 cups grated Swiss cheese
3 tablespoons flour
2 tablespoons butter
1 garlic clove, crushed
3 tablespoons finely chopped chives
1 cup dry white wine
Salt
Freshly ground pepper
A pinch of nutmeg
1/4 cup kirsch

     Mix cheese and flour. Melt butter in chafing-dish blazer rubbed
     with garlic. Cook chives in butter 1 minute. Add wine and heat
     just under boiling. Keep simmering as you add cheese-and-flour
     mix gradually, stirring always in one direction. Salt according
     to age and sharpness of cheese; add plenty of freshly ground
     pepper and the pinch of nutmeg.

     When everything is stirred smooth and bubbling, toss in the
     kirsch without missing a stroke of the fork and get to dunking.

     Large, crisp, hot potato chips make a pleasant change for dunking
     purposes. Or try assorted crackers alternating with the absorbent
     bread, or hard rolls.


 Tomato Fondue

2 tomatoes, skinned, seeded and chopped
1/2 teaspoon dried sweet basil
1 clove garlic
2 tablespoons butter
1/2 cup dry white wine
2 cups grated Cheddar cheese
Paprika

     Mix basil with chopped tomatoes. Rub chafing dish with garlic,
     melt butter, add tomatoes and much paprika. Cook 5 to 6 minutes,
     add wine, stir steadily to boiling point. Then add cheese, half a
     cup at a time, and keep stirring until everything is smooth.

     Serve on hot toast, like Welsh Rabbit.

Here the two most popular melted-cheese dishes tangle, but they're
held together with the common ingredient, tomato.

Fondue also appears as a sauce to pour over baked tomatoes. Stale
bread crumbs are soaked in tomato juice to make:

 Tomato Baked Fondue

1 cup tomato juice
1 cup stale bread crumbs
1 cup grated sharp American cheese
1 tablespoon melted butter
Salt
4 eggs, separated and well beaten

     Soak crumbs in tomato juice, stir cheese in butter until melted,
     season with a little or no salt, depending on saltiness of the
     cheese. Mix in the beaten yolks, fold in the white and bake
     about 50 minutes in moderate oven.


BAKED FONDUES

Although Savarin's dunking Fondue was first to make a sensation on
these shores and is still in highest esteem among epicures, the Fondue
America took to its bosom was baked. The original recipe came from the
super-caseous province of Savoy under the explicit title, _La Fondue
au Fromage_.


 La Fondue au Fromage

     Make the usual creamy mixture of butter, flour, milk, yolks of
     eggs and Gruyère, in thin slices for a change. Use red pepper
     instead of black, splash in a jigger of kirsch but no white wine.
     Finally fold in the egg whites and bake in a mold for 45 minutes.

We adapted this to our national taste which had already based the
whole business of melted cheese on the Welsh Rabbit with stale ale or
milk instead of white wine and Worcestershire, mustard and hot
peppers. Today we have come up with this:


 100% American Fondue

2 cups scalded milk
2 cups stale bread crumbs
1/2 teaspoon dry English mustard
Salt
Dash of nutmeg
Dash of pepper
2 cups American cheese (Cheddar)
2 egg yolks, well beaten
2 egg whites, beaten stiff

     Soak crumbs in milk, season and stir in the cheese until melted.
     Add the beaten egg yolks and stir until you have a smooth
     mixture. Let this cool while beating the whites stiff, leaving
     them slightly moist. Fold the whites into the cool, custardy mix
     and bake in a buttered dish until firm. (About 50 minutes in a
     moderate oven.)

This is more of a baked cheese job than a true Fondue, to our way of
thinking, and the scalded milk doesn't exactly take the place of the
wine or kirsch. It is characteristic of our bland cookery.


OTHER FONDUES PLAIN AND FANCY, BAKED AND NOT


 Quickie Catsup Tummy Fondiddy

3/4 pound sharp cheese, diced
1 can condensed tomato soup
1/2 cup catsup
1/2 teaspoon mustard
1 egg, lightly beaten

     In double boiler melt cheese in soup. Blend thoroughly by
     constant stirring. Remove from heat, lightly whip or fold in the
     catsup and mustard mixed with egg. Serve on Melba toast or rusks.

This might be suggested as a novel midnight snack, with a cup of
cocoa, for a change.


 Cheese and Rice Fondue

1 cup cooked rice
2 cups milk
4 eggs, separated and well beaten
1/2 cup grated cheese
1/2 teaspoon salt
Cayenne, Worcestershire sauce or tabasco sauce, or all three

     Heat rice (instead of bread crumbs) in milk, stir in cheese until
     melted, add egg yolks beaten lemon-yellow, season, fold in stiff
     egg whites. Serve hot on toast.

 Corn and Cheese Fondue

1 cup bread crumbs
1 large can creamed corn
1 small onion, chopped
1/2 green pepper, chopped
2 cups cottage cheese
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 cup milk
2 eggs, well beaten

     Mix all ingredients together and bake in buttered casserole set
     in pan of hot water. Bake about 1 hour in moderate oven, or until
     set.


 Cheese Fondue

1 cup grated Cheddar
1/2 cup crumbled Roquefort
1 cup pimento cheese
3 tablespoons cream
3 tablespoons butter
1 teaspoon Worcestershire

     Stir everything together over hot water until smooth and creamy.
     Then whisk until fluffy, moistening with more cream or mayonnaise
     if too stiff.

     Serve on Melba toast, or assorted thin toasted crackers.


 Brick Fondue

1/2 cup butter
2 cups grated Brick cheese
1/2 cup warm milk
1/2 teaspoon salt
2 eggs

     Melt butter and cheese together, use wire whisk to whip in the
     warm milk. Season. Take from fire and beat in the eggs, one at a
     time. Please note that Fondue protocol calls for each egg to be
     beaten separately in cases like this.

     Serve over hot toast or crackers.

 Cheddar Dunk Bowl

3/4 pound sharp Cheddar cheese
3 tablespoons cream
2/3 teaspoon dry mustard
1-1/2 teaspoons Worcestershire

     Grate the cheese powdery fine and mash it together with the cream
     until fluffy. Season and serve in a beautiful bowl for dunking in
     the original style of Savarin, although this is a static
     imitation of the real thing.

     All kinds of crackers and colorful dips can be used, from celery
     stalks and potato chips to thin paddles cut from Bombay duck.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Seven_

Soufflés, Puffs and Ramekins


There isn't much difference between Cheese Soufflés, Puffs and
Ramekins. The _English Encyclopedia of Practical Cookery_, the oldest,
biggest and best of such works in English, lumps Cheese Puffs and
Ramekins together, giving the same recipes for both, although it
treats each extensively under its own name when not made with cheese.

Cheese was the basis of the original French Ramequin, cheese and bread
crumbs or puff paste, baked in a mold, (with puff again the principal
factor in Soufflé, from the French _souffler_, puff up).

 Basic Soufflé

3 tablespoons butter or margarine
4 tablespoons flour
1-1/4 cups hot milk, scalded
1 teaspoon salt
A dash of cayenne
1/2 cup grated Cheddar cheese, sharp
2 egg yolks, beaten lemon-yellow
2 egg whites, beaten stiff

     Melt butter, stir in flour and milk gradually until thick and
     smooth. Season and add the cheese, continuing the cooking and
     slow stirring until velvety. Remove from heat and let cool
     somewhat; then stir in the egg yolks with a light hand and an
     upward motion. Fold in the stiff whites and when evenly mixed
     pour into a big, round baking dish. (Some butter it and some
     don't.) To make sure the top will be even when baked, run a spoon
     or knife around the surface, about 1 inch from the edge of the
     dish, before baking slowly in a moderate oven until puffed high
     and beautifully browned. Serve instantly for fear the Soufflé may
     fall. The baking takes up to an hour and the egg whites shouldn't
     be beaten so stiff they are hard to fold in and contain no air to
     expand and puff up the dish.

To perk up the seasonings, mustard, Worcestershire sauce, lemon juice,
nutmeg and even garlic are often used to taste, especially in England.

While Cheddar is the preferred cheese, Parmesan runs it a close
second. Then comes Swiss. You may use any two or all three of these
together. Sometimes Roquefort is added, as in the Ramekin recipes
below.


 Parmesan Soufflé

     Make the same as Basic Soufflé, with these small modifications in
     the ingredients:

1 full cup of grated Parmesan
1 extra egg in place of the 1/2 cup of  Cheddar cheese
A little more butter
Black pepper, not cayenne


 Swiss Soufflé

     Make the same as Basic Soufflé, with these slight changes:

1-1/4 cups grated Swiss cheese instead of the Cheddar cheese
Nutmeg in place of the cayenne


 Parmesan-Swiss Soufflé

     Make the same as Basic Soufflé, with these little differences:

1/2 cup grated Swiss cheese, and 1/2 cup grated Parmesan in place of
the Cheddar cheese
1/4 teaspoon each of sugar and black pepper for seasoning.

Any of these makes a light, lovely luncheon or a proper climax to a
grand dinner.


 Cheese-Corn Soufflé

     Make as Basic Soufflé, substituting for the scalded milk 1 cup of
     sieved and strained juice from cream-style canned corn.


 Cheese-Spinach Soufflé

     Sauté 1-1/2 cups of finely chopped, drained spinach in butter
     with 1 teaspoon finely grated onion, and then whip it until light
     and fluffy. Mix well into the white sauce of the Basic Soufflé
     before adding the cheese and following the rest of the recipe.


 Cheese-Tomato Soufflé

     Substitute hot tomato juice for the scalded milk.


 Cheese-Sea-food Soufflé

     Add 1-1/2 cups finely chopped or ground lobster, crab, shrimp,
     other sea food or mixture thereof, with any preferred seasoning
     added.


 Cheese-Mushroom Soufflé

1-1/2 cups grated sharp Cheddar
1 cup cream of mushroom soup
Paprika, to taste
Salt
2 egg yolks, well beaten
2 egg whites, beaten stiff
2 tablespoons chopped, cooked bacon
2 tablespoons sliced, blanched almonds

     Heat cheese with soup and paprika, adding the cheese gradually
     and stirring until smooth. Add salt and thicken the sauce with
     egg yolks, still stirring steadily, and finally fold in the
     whites. Sprinkle with bacon and almonds and bake until golden
     brown and puffed high (about 1 hour).


 Cheese-Potato Soufflé (Potato Puff)

6 potatoes
2 onions
1 tablespoon butter or margarine
1 cup hot milk
3/4 cup grated Cheddar cheese
1 teaspoon salt
A dash of pepper
2 egg yolks, well beaten
2 egg whites, beaten stiff
1/4 cup grated Cheddar cheese

     Cook potatoes and onions together until tender and put through a
     ricer. Mix with all the other ingredients except the egg whites
     and the Cheddar. Fold in the egg whites, mix thoroughly and pour
     into a buttered baking dish. Sprinkle the 1/4 cup of Cheddar on
     top and bake in moderate oven about 1/2 hour, until golden-brown
     and well puffed. Serve instantly.

     Variations of this popular Soufflé leave out the onion and
     simplify matters by using 2 cups of mashed potatoes. Sometimes 1
     tablespoon of catsup and another of minced parsley is added to
     the mixture. Or onion juice alone, to take the place of the
     cooked onions--about a tablespoon, full or scant.

The English, in concocting such a Potato Puff or Soufflé, are inclined
to make it extra peppery, as they do most of their Cheese Soufflés,
with not only "a dust of black pepper" but "as much cayenne as may be
stood on the face of a sixpence."


 Cheese Fritter Soufflés

     These combine ham with Parmesan cheese and are even more
     delicately handled in the making than crêpes suzette.


PUFFS


 Three-in-One Puffs

1 cup grated Swiss
1 cup grated Parmesan
1 cup cream cheese
5 eggs, lightly beaten
salt and pepper

     Mix the cheeses into one mass moistened with the beaten eggs,
     splashed on at intervals. When thoroughly incorporated, put in
     ramekins, tiny tins, cups, or any sort of little mold of any
     shape. Bake in hot oven about 10 minutes, until richly browned.

Such miniature Soufflés serve as liaison officers for this entire
section, since they are baked in ramekins, or ramequins, from the
French word for the small baking dish that holds only one portion.
These may be paper boxes, usually round, earthenware, china, Pyrex,
of any attractive shape in which to bake or serve the Puffs.

More commonly, in America at least, Puffs are made without ramekin
dishes, as follows:


 Fried Puffs

2 egg whites, beaten stiff
1/2 cup grated cheese
1 tablespoon flour
Salt
Paprika

     Into the stiff egg whites fold the cheese, flour and seasonings.
     When thoroughly mixed pat into shape desired, roll in crumbs and
     fry.


 Roquefort Puffs

1/8 pound genuine French Roquefort
1 egg white, beaten stiff
8 crackers or 2-inch bread rounds

     Cream the Roquefort, fold in the egg white, pile on crackers and
     bake 15 minutes in slow oven.

The constant repetition of "beaten stiff" in these recipes may give
the impression that the whites are badly beaten up, but such is not
the case. They are simply whipped to peaks and left moist and
glistening as a teardrop, with a slight sad droop to them that shows
there is still room for the air to expand and puff things up in
cooking.


 Parmesan Puffs

     Make a spread of mayonnaise or other salad dressing with equal
     parts of imported Parmesan, grated fine. Spread on a score or
     more of crackers in a roomy pan and broil a couple of minutes
     till they puff up golden-brown.

     Use only the best Parmesan, imported from Italy; or, second best,
     from Argentina where the rich pampas grass and Italian settlers
     get together on excellent Parmesan and Romano. Never buy Parmesan
     already grated; it quickly loses its flavor.


 Breakfast Puffs

1 cup flour
1 cup milk
1/4 cup finely grated cheese
1 egg, lightly beaten
1/2 teaspoon salt

     Mix all together to a smooth, light batter and fill ramekins or
     cups half full; then bake in quick oven until they are puffing
     over the top and golden-brown.


 Danish Fondue Puffs

1 stale roll
1/2 cup boiling hot milk
Salt
Pepper
2 cups freshly grated Cheddar cheese
4 egg yolks, beaten lemon-yellow
4 egg whites, beaten stiff

     Soak roll in boiling milk and beat to a paste. Mix with cheese
     and egg yolks. When smooth and thickened fold in the egg whites
     and fill ramekins, tins, cups or paper forms and slowly bake
     until puffed up and golden-brown.


 New England Cheese Puffs

1 cup sifted flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon Hungarian paprika
1/4 teaspoon dry mustard
2 egg yolks, beaten lemon-yellow
1/2 cup milk
1 cup freshly grated Cheddar cheese
2 egg whites, beaten stiff but not dry

     Sift dry ingredients together, mix yolks with milk and stir in.
     Add cheese and when thoroughly incorporated fold in the egg
     whites to make a smooth batter. Drop from a big spoon into hot
     deep fat and cook until well browned.

     Caraway seeds are sometimes added. Poppy seeds are also used, and
     either of these makes a snappier puff, especially tasty when
     served with soup.

     A few drops of tabasco give this an extra tang.


 Cream Cheese Puffs

1/2 pound cream cheese
1 cup milk
4 eggs, lightly beaten
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon dry mustard

     Soften cheese by heating over hot water. Remove from heat and add
     milk, eggs and seasoning. Beat until well blended, then pour into
     custard cups, ramekins or any other individual baking dishes that
     are attractive enough to serve the puffs in.


RAMEKINS OR RAMEQUINS


Some Ramekin dishes are made so exquisitely that they may be collected
like snuff bottles.

Ramekins are utterly French, both the cooked Puffs and the individual
dishes in which they are baked. Essentially a Cheese Puff, this is
also _au gratin_ when topped with both cheese and browned bread
crumbs. By a sort of poetic cook's license the name is also applied to
any kind of cake containing cheese and cooked in the identifying
one-portion ramekin. It is used chiefly in the plural, however,
together with the name of the chief ingredient, such as "Chicken
Ramekins" and:


 Cheese Ramekins I

2 eggs
2 tablespoons flour
1/8 pound butter, melted
1/8 pound grated cheese

     Mix well and bake in individual molds for 15 minutes.


 Cheese Ramekins II

3 tablespoons melted butter
1/2 teaspoon each, salt and pepper
3/4 cup bread crumbs
1/2 cup grated cheese
2 eggs, lightly beaten
1-1/2 cups milk

     Mix the first four dry ingredients together, stir eggs into the
     milk and add. Stir to a smooth batter and bake in buttered
     ramekins, standing in water, in moderate oven. Serve piping hot,
     for like Soufflés and all associated Puffs, the hot air will puff
     out of them quickly; then they will sink and be inedible.


TWO ANCIENT ENGLISH RECIPES, STILL GOING STRONG


 Cheese Ramekins III

     Grate 1/2 pound of any dry, rich cheese. Butter a dozen small
     paper cases, or little boxes of stiff writing paper like Soufflé
     cases. Put a saucepan containing 1/2 pint of water over the fire,
     add 2 tablespoons of butter, and when the water boils, stir in 1
     heaping tablespoonful of flour. Beat the mixture until it shrinks
     away from the sides of the saucepan; then stir in the grated
     cheese. Remove the paste thus made from the fire, and let it
     partly cool. In the meantime separate the yolks from the whites
     of three eggs, and beat them until the yolks foam and the whites
     make a stiff froth. Put the mixture at once into the buttered
     paper cases, only half-filling them (since they rise very high
     while being baked) with small slices of cheese, and bake in a
     moderate oven for about 15 minutes. As soon as the Puffs are
     done, put the cases on a hot dish covered with a folded napkin,
     and serve very hot.

The most popular cheese for Ramekins has always been, and still is,
Gruyère. But because the early English also adopted Italian Parmesan,
that followed as a close second, and remains there today.

Sharp Cheddar makes tangy Ramekins, as will be seen in this second
oldster; for though it prescribes Gloucester and Cheshire
"'arf-and-'arf," both are essentially Cheddars. Gloucester has been
called "a glorified Cheshire" and the latter has long been known as a
peculiarly rich and colorful elder brother of Cheddar, described in
Kenelme Digby's _Closet Open'd_ as a "quick, fat, rich, well-tasted
cheese."


 Cheese Ramekins IV

     Scrape fine 1/4 pound of Gloucester cheese and 1/4 pound of
     Cheshire cheese. Beat this scraped cheese in a mortar with the
     yolks of 4 eggs, 1/4 pound of fresh butter, and the crumbs of a
     French roll boiled in cream until soft. When all this is well
     mixed and pounded to a paste, add the beaten whites of 4 eggs.
     Should the paste seem too stiff, 1 or 2 tablespoons of sherry may
     be added. Put the paste into paper cases, and bake in a Dutch
     oven till nicely browned. The Ramekins should be served very hot.

Since both Gloucester cheese and Cheshire cheese are not easily come
by even in London today, it would be hard to reproduce this in the
States. So the best we can suggest is to use half-and-half of two of
our own great Cheddars, say half-Coon and half-Wisconsin Longhorn, or
half-Tillamook and half-Herkimer County. For there's no doubt about
it, contrasting cheeses tickle the taste buds, and as many as three
different kinds put together make Puffs all the more perfect.


 Ramequins à la Parisienne

2 cups milk
1 cup cream
1 ounce salt butter
1 tablespoon flour
1/2 cup grated Gruyère
Coarsely ground pepper
An atom of nutmeg
A _soupçon_ of garlic
A light touch of powdered sugar
8 eggs, separated

     Boil milk and cream together. Melt butter, mix in the flour and
     stir over heat 5 minutes, adding the milk and cream mixture a
     little at a time. When thoroughly cooked, remove from heat and
     stir in cheese, seasonings and the yolks of all 8 eggs, well
     beaten, and the whites of 2 even better beaten. When well mixed,
     fold in the remaining egg whites, stiffly beaten, until you have
     a batter as smooth and thick as cream. Pour this into ramekins of
     paper, porcelain or earthenware, filling each about 2/3 full to
     allow for them to puff up as they bake in a very slow oven until
     golden-brown (or a little less than 20 minutes).


 Le Ramequin Morézien

     This celebrated specialty of Franche-Comté is described as "a
     porridge of water, butter, seasoning, chopped garlic and toast;
     thickened with minced Gruyère and served very hot."

Several French provinces are known for distinctive individual Puffs
usually served in the dainty fluted forms they are cooked in. In
Jeanne d'Arc's Lorraine, for instance, there are the simply named _Les
Ramequins_, made of flour, Gruyère and eggs.


 Swiss-Roquefort Ramekins

1/4 pound Swiss cheese
1/4 pound Roquefort cheese
1/2 pound butter
8 eggs, separated
4 breakfast rolls, crusts removed
1/2 cup cream

     The batter is made in the usual way, with the soft insides of the
     rolls simmered in the cream and stirred in. The egg whites are
     folded in last, as always, the batter poured into ramekins part
     full and baked to a golden-brown. Then they are served
     instantaneously, lest they fall.

 Puff Paste Ramekins

     Puff or other pastry is rolled out fiat and sprinkled with fine
     tasty cheese or any cheese mixture, such as Parmesan with Gruyère
     and/or Swiss Sapsago for a piquant change, but in lesser quantity
     than the other cheeses used. Parmesan cheese has long been the
     favorite for these.

     Fold paste into 3 layers, roll out again and dust with more
     cheese. Fold once more and roll this out and cut in small fancy
     shapes to bake 10 to 15 minutes in a hot oven. Brushing with egg
     yolk before baking makes these Ramekins shine.


 Frying Pan Ramekins

     Melt 2 ounces of butter, let it cool a little and then mix with
     1/2 pound of cheese. Fold in the whites of 3 eggs, beaten stiff
     but not dry. Cover frying pan with buttered papers, put slices of
     bread on this and cover with the cheese mixture. Cook about 5
     minutes, take it off and brown it with a salamander.

There are two schools of salamandering among turophiles. One holds
that it toughens the cheese and makes it less digestible; the other
that it's simply swell. Some of the latter addicts have special
cheese-branding irons made with their monograms, to identify their
creations, whether they be burned on the skins of Welsh Rabbits or
Frying Pan Ramekins. Salamandering with an iron that has a gay,
carnivalesque design can make a sort of harlequin Ramekin.


 Casserole Ramekin

     Here is the Americanization of a French original: In a deep
     casserole lay alternate slices of white bread and Swiss cheese,
     with the cheese slices a bit bigger all around. Beat 2 eggs with
     2 cups of milk, season with salt and--of all things--nutmeg!
     Proceed to bake like individual Ramekins.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Eight_

Pizzas, Blintzes, Pastes, Cheese Cakes, etc.


No matter how big or hungry your family, you can always appease them
with pizza.


 Pizza--The Tomato Pie of Sicily

DOUGH

1 package yeast, dissolved in warm water
2 cups sifted flour
1 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons olive oil

     Make dough of this. Knead 12 to 20 minutes. Pat into a ball,
     cover it tight and let stand 3 hours in warm place until twice
     the size.

TOMATO PASTE

3 tablespoons olive oil
2 large onions, sliced thin
1 can Italian tomato paste
8 to 10 anchovy filets, cut small
1/2 teaspoon oregano
Salt
Crushed chili pepper
2-1/2 cups water

     In the oil fry onion tender but not too brown, stir in tomato
     paste and keep stirring 3 or 4 minutes. Season, pour water over
     and simmer slowly 25 to 30 minutes. Add anchovies when sauce is
     done.

CHEESE

1/2 cup grated Italian, Parmesan, Romano or Pecorino, depending
on your pocketbook

     Procure a low, wide and handsome tin pizza pan, or reasonable
     substitute, and grease well before spreading the well-raised
     dough 1/2 to 3/4 inch thick. Poke your finger tips haphazardly
     into the dough to make marks that will catch the sauce when you
     pour it on generously. Shake on Parmesan or Parmesan-type cheese
     and bake in hot oven 1/2 hour, then 1/4 hour more at lower heat
     until the pizza is golden-brown. Cut in wedges like any other pie
     and serve.

The proper pans come all tin and a yard wide, down to regular
apple-pie size, but twelve-inch pans are the most popular.


 Miniature Pizzas

     Miniature pizzas are split English muffins rubbed with garlic or
     onion and brushed with olive oil. Cover with tomato sauce and a
     slice of Mozzarella cheese, anchovy, oregano and grated Parmesan,
     and heat 8 minutes.


 Italian-Swiss Scallopini

1 pound paper-thin veal cutlets
1/2 cup flour
1/2 cup grated Swiss and Parmesan, mixed
1 egg yolk, lightly beaten with water
Butter
Salt
Paprika

     Moisten veal with egg and roll in flour mixed with cheese,
     quickly brown, lower flame and cook 4 to 5 minutes till tender.
     Dust with paprika and salt.


 Neapolitan Baked Lasagne, or Stuffed Noodles

1 pound lasagne, or other wide noodles
1-1/2 cups cooked thick tomato sauce with meat
1/2 pound Ricotta or cottage cheese
1 pound Mozzarella or American Cheddar
1/4 pound grated Parmesan, Romano or Pecorino
Salt
Pepper, preferably crushed red pods
A shaker filled with grated Parmesan, or reasonable substitute

     Cook wide or broad noodles 15 to 20 minutes in rapidly boiling
     salted water until tender, but not soft, and drain. Pour 1/2 cup
     of tomato sauce in baking dish or pan, cover with about 1/2 of
     the noodles, sprinkle with grated Parmesan, a layer of sauce, a
     layer of Mozzarella and dabs of Ricotta. Continue in this
     fashion, alternating layers and seasoning each, ending with a
     final spread of sauce, Parmesan and red pepper. Bake firm in
     moderate oven, about 15 minutes, and served in wedges like pizza,
     with canisters of grated Parmesan, crushed red pepper pods and
     more of the sauce to taste.


 Little Hats, Cappelletti

     Freshly made and still moist Cappelletti, little hats, contrived
     out of tasty paste, may be had in any Little Italy macaroni shop.
     These may be stuffed sensationally in four different flavors
     with only two cheeses.

     Brown slices of chicken and ham separately, in butter. Mince each
     very fine and divide in half, to make four mixtures in equal
     amounts. Season these with salt, pepper and nutmeg and a binding
     of 2 parts egg yolk to I part egg white.

     With these meat mixtures you can make four different-flavored
     fillings:

     Ham and Mozzarella Chicken and Mozzarella Ham and Ricotta Chicken
     and Ricotta

     Fill the little hats alternately, so you'll have the same number
     of each different kind. Pinch edges tight together to keep the
     stuffings in while boiling fast for 5 minutes in chicken broth
     (or salted water, if you must).

     Since these Cappelletti are only a pleasing form and shape of
     ravioli, they are served in the same way on hot plates, with
     plain tomato sauce and Parmesan or reasonable substitute. If we
     count this final seasoning as an ingredient, this makes three
     cheeses, so that each of half a dozen taste buds can be getting
     individual sensations without letting the others know what it's
     doing.


 Dauphiny Ravioli

     This French variant of the famous Italian pockets of pastry
     follows the Cappelletti pattern, with any fresh goat cheese and
     Gruyère melted with butter and minced parsley and boiled in
     chicken broth.


 Italian Fritters

1/4 cup flour
2 tablespoons sugar
1/4 pound fresh Ricotta
2 eggs, beaten
1/2 cup shredded Mozzarella
Rind of 1/2 lemon, grated
3 tablespoons brandy
Salt

     Stir and mix well together in the order given and let stand 1
     hour or more to thicken the batter so it will hold its shape
     while cooking.

     Shape batter like walnuts and hold one at a time in the bowl of a
     long-handled spoon dipped for 10 seconds in boiling hot oil.
     Fritter the "walnuts" so, and serve at once with powdered sugar.

     To make fascinating cheese croquettes, mix several contrasting
     cheeses in this batter.


 Italian Asparagus and Cheese

     This gives great scope for contrasting cheeses in one and the
     same dish. In a shallow baking pan put a foundation layer of
     grated Cheddar and a little butter. Cover with a layer of tender
     parts of asparagus, lightly salted; next a layer of grated
     Gruyère with a bit of butter, and another of asparagus. From here
     you can go as far as you like with varied layers of melting
     cheeses alternating with asparagus, until you come to the top,
     where you add two more kinds of cheese, a mixture of powdered
     Parmesan with Sapsago to give the new-mown hay scent.


 Garlic on Cheese

     For one sandwich prepare 30 or 40 garlic cloves by removing skins
     and frying out the fierce pungence in smoking olive oil. They
     skip in the hot pan like Mexican jumping beans. Toast one side of
     a thickish slice of bread, put this side down on a grilling pan,
     cover it with a slice of imported Swiss Emmentaler or Gruyère, of
     about the same size, shape and thickness. Stick the cooked garlic
     cloves, while still blistering hot, in a close pattern into the
     cheese and brown for a minute under the grill. Salt lightly and
     dash with paprika for the color. (Recipe by Bob Brown in Merle
     Armitage's collection _Fit for a King_.)

Spaniards call garlic cloves teeth, Englishmen call them toes. It was
cheese and garlic together that inspired Shakespeare to Hotspur's
declaration in _King Henry IV_:

    I had rather live
    With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
    Than feed on cates and have him talk to me
    In any summer-house in Christendom.

Some people can take a mere _soupçon_ of the stuff, while others can
down it by the soup spoon, so we feel it necessary in reprinting our
recipe to point to the warning of another early English writer:
"Garlic is very dangerous to young children, fine women and hot young
men."


 Blintzes

     This snow white member of the crêpes suzette sorority is the most
     popular deb in New York's fancy cheese dishes set. Almost unknown
     here a decade or two ago, it has joined blinis, kreplach and
     cheeseburgers as a quick and sustaining lunch for office workers.

2 eggs
1 cup water
1 cup sifted flour
Salt
Cooking oil
1/2 pound cottage cheese
2 tablespoons butter
2 cups sour cream

     Beat 1 egg light and make a batter with the water, flour and salt
     to taste. Heat a well-greased small frying pan and make little
     pancakes with 2 tablespoons of batter each. Cook the cakes over
     low heat and on one side only. Slide each cake off on a white
     cloth, with the cooked side down. While these are cooling make
     the blintz-filling by beating together the second egg, cottage
     cheese and butter. Spread each pancake thickly with the mixture
     and roll or make into little pockets or envelopes with the end
     tucked in to hold the filling. Cook in foil till golden-brown and
     serve at once with sufficient sour cream to smother them.


 Vatroushki

     Russia seems to have been the cradle of all sorts of blinis and
     blintzes, and perhaps the first, of them to be made was
     vatroushki, a variant of the blintzes above. The chief
     difference is that rounds of puff paste dough are used instead of
     the hot cakes, 1 teaspoon of sugar is added to the cottage cheese
     filling, and the sour cream, 1/2 cup, is mixed into this instead
     of being served with it. Little cups filled with this mix are
     made by pinching the edges of the dough together. The tops are
     brushed with egg yolk and baked in a brisk oven.


 Cottage Cheese Pancakes

1 cup prepared pancake
4 tablespoons top milk or light cream
1 teaspoon salt
4 eggs, well beaten
1 tablespoon sugar
2 cups cottage cheese, put through ricer

     Mix batter and stir in cheese last until smooth.


 Cheese Waffles

2 cups prepared waffle flour
3 egg yolks, lightly beaten
1/4 cup melted butter
3/4 cup grated sharp Cheddar
3 egg whites, beaten stiff

     Stir up a smooth waffle batter of the first 4 ingredients and
     fold in egg whites last.

Today you can get imported canned Holland cheese waffles to heat
quickly and serve.


 Napkin Dumpling

1 pound cottage cheese
1/8 pound butter, softened
3 eggs, beaten
3/4 cup Farina
1/2 teaspoon salt
Cinnamon and brown sugar

     Mix together all ingredients (except the cinnamon and sugar) to
     form a ball. Moisten a linen napkin with cold water and tie the
     ball of dough in it. Simmer 40 to 50 minutes in salted boiling
     water, remove from napkin, sprinkle well with cinnamon and brown
     sugar, and serve. This is on the style of Hungarian potato and
     other succulent dumplings and may be served with goulash or as a
     meal in itself.


BUTTER AND CHEESE


    Where fish is scant
    And fruit of trees,
    Supply that want
    With butter and cheese.

    Thomas Tusser in
    _The Last Remedy_

Butter and cheese are mixed together in equal parts for cheese butter.
Serbia has a cheese called Butter that more or less matches Turkey's
Durak, of which butter is an indispensable ingredient, and French
Cancoillote is based on sour milk simmered with butter.

The English have a cheese called Margarine, made with the butter
substitute. In Westphalia there are no two schools of thought about
whether 'tis better to eat butter with cheese or not, for in
Westphalia sour-milk cheese, butter is mixed in as part of the process
of making. The Arabs press curds and butter together to store in vats,
and the Scots have Crowdie or Cruddy Butter.


BUTTERMILK CHEESE


The value of buttermilk is stressed in an extravagant old Hindu
proverb: "A man may live without bread, but without buttermilk he
dies."

Cheese was made before butter, being the earliest form of dairy
manufacturing, so buttermilk cheese came well after plain milk cheese,
even after whey cheese. It is very tasty, and a natural with potato
salad. The curd is salted after draining and sold in small parchment
packages.

German "leather" cheese has buttermilk mixed with the plain. The Danes
make their Appetitost with sour buttermilk. Ricotta Romano, for a
novelty, is made of sheep buttermilk.


COTTAGE CHEESE


In America cottage cheese is also called pot, Dutch and smearcase. It
is the easiest and quickest to make of all cheeses, by simply letting
milk sour, or adding buttermilk to curdle it, then stand a while on
the back of the kitchen stove, since it is homemade as a rule. It is
drained in a bag of cheesecloth and may be eaten the same day, usually
salted.

The Pilgrims brought along the following two tried and true recipes
from olde England, and both are still in use and good repute:


_Cottage Cheese No. 1_

Let milk sour until clotted. Pour boiling water over and it will
immediately curd. Stir well and pour into a colander. Pour a little
cold water on the curd, salt it and break it up attractively for
serving.


_Cottage Cheese No. 2_

A very rich and tasty variety is made of equal parts whole milk and
buttermilk heated together to just under the boiling point. Pour into
a linen bag and let drain until next day. Then remove, salt to taste
and add a bit of butter or cream to make a smooth, creamy consistency,
and pat into balls the size of a Seville orange.


CREAM CHEESE


In England there are three distinct manners of making cream cheese:

1. Fresh milk strained and lightly drained.
2. Scalded cream dried and drained dry, like Devonshire.
3. Rennet curd ripened, with thin, edible rind, or none, packaged
in small blocks or miniature bricks by dairy companies, as
in the U.S. Philadelphia Cream cheese.

American cream cheeses follow the English pattern, being named from
then: region or established brands owned by Breakstone, Borden, Kraft,
Shefford, etc.

Cream cheese such as the first listed above is easier to make than
cottage cheese or any other. Technically, in fact, it is not a cheese
but the dried curd of milk and is often called virginal. Fresh milk is
simply strained through muslin in a perforated box through which the
whey and extra moisture drains away for three or four days, leaving a
residue as firm as fresh butter.

In America, where we mix cream cheese with everything, a popular
assortment of twelve sold in New York bears these ingredients and
names: Chives, Cherry, Garden, Caviar, Lachs, Pimiento, Olive and
Pimiento, Pineapple, Relish, Scallion, Strawberry, and Triple Decker
of Relish, Pimiento and Cream in layers.

In Italy there is Stracchino Cream, in Sweden Chantilly. Finally, to
come to France, la Foncée or Fromage de Pau, a cream also known around
the world as Crême d'Isigny, Double Crême, Fromage à la Crême de Gien,
Pots de Crême St. Gervais, etc. etc.

The French go even farther by eating thick fresh cream with Chevretons
du Beaujolais and Fromage Blanc in the style that adds _à la crême_ to
their already glorified names.

The English came along with Snow Cream Cheese that is more of a
dessert, similar to Italian Cream Cheese.

We'd like to have a cheese ice cream to contrast with too sweet ones.
Attempts at this have been made, both here and in England; Scottish
Caledonian cream came closest. We have frozen cheese with fruit, to be
sure, but no true cheese ice cream as yet, though some cream cheeses
seem especially suitable.

    The farmer's daughter hath soft brown hair
    (Butter and eggs and a pound of cheese)
    And I met with a ballad I can't say where,
    That wholly consisted of lines like these,
    (Butter and eggs and a pound of cheese.)

In this parody by Calverly, "The Farmer's Daughter," the ingredients
suggest cheese cake, dating back to 1381 In England. From that year
Kettner in his _Book of the Table_ quotes this recipe:

     Take cream of almonds or of cow milk and beat them well together;
     and make small coffins (that is, cases of pastry), and do it (put
     it) therein; and do (put) thereto sugar and good powders. Or take
     good fat cheese and eggs and make them of divers colours, green,
     red or yellow, and bake them or serve them forth.

This primitive "receipt" grew up into Richmond maids of honor that
caused Kettner to wax poetic with:

     At Richmond we are permitted to touch with our lips a countless
     number of these maids--light and airy as the "airy, fairy
     Lilian." What more can the finest poetry achieve in quickening
     the things of earth into tokens and foretastes of heaven, with
     glimpses of higher life and ethereal worlds.


CHEESECAKES


_Coronation Cheese Cake_


The _Oxford Dictionary_ defines cheese cake as a "tartlet filled with
sweet curds, etc." This shows that the cheese is the main thing, and
the and-so-forth just a matter of taste. We are delighted to record
that the Lord Mayor of London picked traditional cheese tarts, the
maids of honor mentioned earlier in this section, as the Coronation
dessert with which to regale the second Queen Elizabeth at the city
luncheon in Guildhall This is most fitting, since these tarts were
named after the maids of honor at the court of the first Queen
Elizabeth. The original recipe is said to have sold for a thousand
pounds. These Richmond maids of honor had the usual cheese cake
ingredients: butter and eggs and pounds of cheese, but what made the
subtle flavor: nutmeg, brandy, lemon, orange-flower water, or all
four?

More than 2,000 years before this land of Coronation cheese cake, the
Greeks had a word for it--several in fact: Apician Cheese Cake,
Aristoxenean, and Philoxenean among them. Then the Romans took it over
and we read from an epistle of the period:

     Thirty times in this one year, Charinus, while you have been
     arranging to make your will, have I sent you cheese cakes
     dripping with Hyblaean Thyme. (Celestial honey, such as that of
     Mount Hymettus we still get from Greece.)

Plato mentioned cheese cake, and a town near Thebes was named for it
before Christ was born, at a time when cheese cakes were widely known
as "dainty food for mortal man."

Today cheese cakes come in a half dozen popular styles, of which the
ones flavored with fresh pineapple are the most popular in New York.
But buyers delight in every sort, including the one hundred percent
American type called cheese pies.

Indeed, there seems to be no dividing line between cheese cakes and
cheese pies. While most of them are sweet, some are made piquant with
pimientos and olives. We offer a favorite of ours made from
popcorn-style pot cheese put through a sieve:


 Pineapple Cheese Cake

2-1/2 pounds sieved pot cheese
1-inch piece vanilla bean
1/4 pound sweet butter, melted
1/2 small box graham crackers, crushed fine
4 eggs
2 cups sugar
1 small can crushed pineapple, drained
2 cups milk
1/3 cup flour

     In a big bowl mix everything except the graham crackers and
     pineapple in the order given above. Butter a square Pyrex pan and
     put in the graham-cracker dust to make a crust. Cover this evenly
     with the pineapple and pour in the cheese-custard mixture. Bake I
     hour in a "quiet" oven, as the English used to say for a moderate
     one, and when done set aside for 12 hours before eating.

Because of the time and labor involved maybe you had better buy your
cheese cakes, even though some of the truly fine ones cost a dime a
bite, especially the pedigreed Jewish-American ones in Manhattan.
Reuben's and Lindy's are two leaders at about five dollars a cake.
Some are fruited with cherries or strawberries.


 Cheese Custard

4 eggs, slightly beaten
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 cup milk
A dash of pepper or paprika
3 tablespoons melted butter
A few drops of onion juice, if desired
4 tablespoons grated Swiss (imported)

     Mix all together, set in molds in pan of hot water, and bake
     until brown.


 Open-faced Cheese Pie

3 eggs
1 cup sugar
2 pounds soft smearcase

     Whip everything together and fill two pie crusts. Bake without
     any upper crust.


The Apple-pie Affinity

Hot apple pie was always accompanied with cheese in New England, even
as every slice of apple pie in Wisconsin has cheese for a sidekick,
according to law. Pioneer hot pies were baked in brick ovens and
flavored with nutmeg, cinnamon and rose geranium. The cheese was
Cheddar, but today all sorts of pie and cheese combinations are
common, such as banana pie and Gorgonzola, mince with Danish Blue,
pumpkin with cream cheese, peach pie with Hablé, and even a green
dusting of Sapsago over raisin pie.

Apple pie _au gratin_, thickly grated over with Parmesan, Caciocavallo
or Sapsago, is something special when served with black coffee. Cider,
too, or applejack, is a natural accompaniment to any dessert of apple
with its cheese.


 Apple Pie Adorned

     Apple pie is adorned with cream and cheese by pressing cream
     cheese through a ricer and folding in plenty of double cream
     beaten thick and salted a little. Put the mixture in a pastry
     tube and decorate top of pie in fanciful fashion.


 Apple Pie á la Cheese

     Lay a slice of melting cheese on top of apple (or any fruit or
     berry) pie, and melt under broiler 2 to 3 minutes.


 Cheese-crusty Apple Pie

     In making an apple pie, roll out the top crust and sprinkle with
     sharp Cheddar, grated, dot with butter and bake golden-brown.


 Flan au Fromage

     To make this Franche-Comté tart of crisp paste, simply mix
     coarsely grated Gruyère with beaten egg, fill the tart cases and
     bake.

     For any cheese pastry or fruit and custard pie crusts, work in
     tasty shredded sharp Cheddar in the ratio of 1 to 4 parts of
     flour.


 Christmas Cake Sandwiches

     A traditional Christmas carol begs for:

    A little bit of spice cake
    A little bit of cheese,
    A glass of cold water,
    A penny, if you please.

     For a festive handout cut the spice cake or fruit cake in slices
     and sandwich them with slices of tasty cheese between.

     To maintain traditional Christmas cheer for the elders, serve
     apple pie with cheese and applejack.


 Angelic Camembert

1 ripe Camembert, imported
1 cup Anjou dry white wine
1/2 pound sweet butter, softened
2 tablespoons finely grated toast crumbs

     Lightly scrape all crusty skin from the Camembert and when its
     creamy interior stands revealed put it in a small, round covered
     dish, pour in the wine, cover tightly so no bouquet or aroma can
     possibly escape, and let stand overnight.

     When ready to serve drain off and discard any wine left, dry the
     cheese and mash with the sweet butter into an angelic paste.
     Reshape in original Camembert form, dust thickly with the crumbs
     and there you are.

Such a delicate dessert is a favorite with the ladies, since some of
them find a prime Camembert a bit too strong if taken straight.

Although A. W. Fulton's observation in _For Men Only_ is going out of
date, it is none the less amusing:

     In the course of a somewhat varied career I have only met one
     woman who appreciated cheese. This quality in her seemed to me so
     deserving of reward that I did not hesitate to acquire her hand
     in marriage.

Another writer has said that "only gourmets among women seem to like
cheese, except farm women and foreigners." The association between
gourmets and farm women is borne out by the following urgent plea from
early Italian landowners:

    _Ai contadini non far sapere
    Quanta è buono it cacio con le pere_.
    Don't let the peasants know
    How good are cheese and pears.

Having found out for ourselves, we suggest a golden slice of Taleggio,
Stracchino, or pale gold Bel Paese to polish off a good dinner, with a
juicy Lombardy pear or its American equivalent, a Bartlett, let us
say.

This celestial association of cheese and pears is further accented by
the French:

    _Entre la poire et le fromage_
    Between the pear and the cheese.

This places the cheese after the fruit, as the last course, in
accordance with early English usage set down by John Clarke in his
_Paroemiologia_:

    After cheese comes nothing.

But in his _Epigrams_ Ben Jonson serves them together.

    Digestive cheese, and fruit there sure will be.

That brings us back to cheese and pippins:

    I will make an end of my dinner; there's
    pippins and cheese to come.

    Shakespeare's _Merry Wives of Windsor_

When should the cheese be served? In England it is served before or
after the fruit, with or without the port.

Following _The Book of Keruynge_ in modern spelling we note when it
was published in 1431 the proper thing "after meat" was "pears, nuts,
strawberries, whortleberries (American huckleberries) and hard
cheese." In modern practice we serve some suitable cheese like
Camembert directly on slices of apple and pears, Gorgonzola on sliced
banana, Hablé spread on pineapple and a cheese dessert tray to match
the Lazy Lou, with everything crunchy down to Crackerjacks. Good, too,
are figs, both fresh and preserved, stuffed with cream cheese,
kumquats, avocados, fruity dunking mixtures of Pineapple cheese,
served in the scooped-out casque of the cheese itself, and apple or
pear and Provolone creamed and put back in the rind it came in. Pots
of liquored and wined cheeses, no end, those of your own making being
the best.


 Champagned Roquefort or Gorgonzola

1/2 pound mellow Roquefort
1/4 pound sweet butter, softened
A dash cayenne
3/4 cup champagne

     With a silver fork mix cheese and butter to a smooth paste,
     moistening with champagne as you go along, using a little more or
     less champagne according to consistency desired. Serve with the
     demitasse and cognac, offering, besides crackers, gilt
     gingerbread in the style of Holland Dutch cheese tasters, or just
     plain bread.

After dinner cheeses suggested by Phil Alpert are:

FROM FRANCE: Port-Salut, Roblochon, Coulommiers, Camembert, Brie,
Roquefort, Calvados (try it with a spot of Calvados, apple brandy)

FROM THE U.S.: Liederkranz, Blue, Cheddar

FROM SWEDEN: Hablé Crême Chantilly

FROM ITALY: Taleggio, Gorgonzola, Provolone, Bel Paese

FROM HUNGARY: Kascaval

FROM SWITZERLAND: Swiss Gruyère

FROM GERMANY: Kümmelkäse

FROM NORWAY: Gjetost, Bondost

FROM HOLLAND: Edam, Gouda

FROM ENGLAND: Stilton

FROM POLAND: Warshawski Syr




[Illustration]

_Chapter Nine_

Au Gratin, Soups, Salads and Sauces


He who says _au gratin_ says Parmesan. Thomas Gray, the English poet,
saluted it two centuries ago with:

    Parma, the happy country where huge cheeses grow.

On September 4, 1666, Pepys recorded the burying of his pet Parmesan,
"as well as my wine and some other things," in a pit in Sir W.
Batten's garden. And on the selfsame fourth of September, more than a
century later, in 1784, Woodforde in his _Diary of a Country Parson_
wrote:

     I sent Mr. Custance about 3 doz. more of apricots, and he sent me
     back another large piece of fine Parmesan cheese. It was very
     kind of him.

The second most popular cheese for _au gratin_ is Italian Romano, and,
for an entirely different flavor, Swiss Sapsago. The French, who gave
us this cookery term, use it in its original meaning for any dish with
a browned topping, usually of bread crumbs, or crumbs and cheese. In
America we think of _au gratin_ as grated cheese only, although
Webster says, "with a browned covering, often mixed with butter or
cheese; as, potatoes _au gratin_." So let us begin with that.


 Potatoes au Gratin

2 cups diced cooked potatoes
2 tablespoons grated onion
1/2 cup grated American Cheddar cheese
2 tablespoons butter
1/2 cup milk
1 egg
Salt
Pepper
More grated cheese for covering

     In a buttered baking dish put a layer of diced potatoes, sprinkle
     with onion and bits of butter. Next, scatter on a thin layer of
     cheese and alternate with potatoes, onions and butter. Stir milk,
     egg, salt and pepper together and pour it on the mixture. Top
     everything with plenty of grated cheese to make it authentically
     American _au gratin_. Bake until firm in moderate oven, about 1/2
     hour.


 Eggs au Gratin

     Make a white sauce flavored with minced onion to pour over any
     desired number of eggs broken into a buttered baking dish. Begin
     by using half of the sauce and sprinkling on a lot of grated
     cheese. After the eggs are in, pour on the rest of the sauce,
     cover it with grated cheese and bread crumbs, drop in bits of
     butter, and cook until brown in oven (or about 12 minutes).


 Tomatoes au Gratin

     Cover bottom of shallow baking pan with slices of tomato and
     sprinkle liberally with bread crumbs and grated cheese, season
     with salt, pepper and dots of butter, add another layer of
     tomato slices, season as before and continue this, alternating
     with cheese, until pan is full. Add a generous topping of crumbs,
     cheese and butter. Bake 50 minutes in moderate oven.


 Onion Soup au Gratin

4 or 5 onions, sliced
4 or 5 tablespoons butter
1 quart stock or canned consommé
1 quart bouillon made from dissolving 4 or 5 cubes
Rounds of toasted French bread
1-1/2 cups grated Parmesan cheese

     Sauté onions in butter in a roomy saucepan until light golden,
     and pour the stock over. When heated put in a larger casserole,
     add the bouillon, season to taste and heat to boiling point. Let
     simmer 15 minutes and serve in deep well-heated soup plates, the
     bottoms covered with rounds of toasted French bread which have
     been heaped with freshly grated Parmesan and browned under the
     broiler. More cheese is served for guests to sprinkle on as
     desired.

At gala parties, where wine flows, a couple of glasses of champagne
are often added to the bouillon.

In the famed onion soup _au gratin_ at Les Halles in Paris, grated
Gruyère is used in place of Parmesan. They are interchangeable in this
recipe.


AMERICAN CHEESE SOUPS

     In this era of fine canned soups a quick cheese soup is made by
     heating cream of tomato soup, ready made, and adding finely
     grated Swiss or Parmesan to taste. French bread toasted and
     topped with more cheese and broiled golden makes the best base to
     pour this over, as is done with the French onion soup above.

     The same cheese toasts are the basis of a simple milk-cheese
     soup, with heated milk poured over and a seasoning of salt,
     pepper, chopped chives, or a dash of nutmeg.


 Chicken Cheese Soup

     Heat together 1 cup milk, 1 cup water in which 2 chicken bouillon
     cubes have been dissolved, and 1 can of condensed cream of
     chicken soup. Stir in 1/4 cup grated American Cheddar cheese and
     season with salt, pepper, and plenty of paprika until cheese
     melts.

     Other popular American recipes simply add grated cheese to lima
     bean or split bean soup, peanut butter soup, or plain cheese soup
     with rice.

Imported French _marmites_ are _de rigueur_ for a real onion soup _au
gratin_, and an imported Parmesan grinder might be used for freshly
ground cheese. In preparing, it is well to remember that they are
basically only melted cheese, melted from the top down.


CHEESE SALADS

     When a Frenchman reaches the salad he is resting and in no hurry.
     He eats the salad to prepare himself for the cheese.

     Henri Charpentier, _Life & la Henri_,


 Green Cheese Salad Julienne

     Take endive, water cress and as many different kinds of crisp
     lettuce as you can find and mix well with Provolone cheese cut in
     thin julienne strips and marinated 3 to 4 hours in French
     dressing. Crumble over the salad some Blue cheese and toss
     everything thoroughly, with plenty of French dressing.


 American Cheese Salad

     Slice a sweet ripe pineapple thin and sprinkle with shredded
     American Cheddar. Serve on lettuce dipped in French dressing.


 Cheese and Nut Salad

     Mix American Cheddar with an equal amount of nut meats and enough
     mayonnaise to make a paste. Roll these in little balls and serve
     with fruit salads, dusting lightly with finely grated Sapsago.


 Brie or Camembert Salad

     Fill ripe pear-or peach-halves with creamy imported Brie or
     Camembert, sprinkle with honey, serve on lettuce drenched with
     French dressing and scatter shredded almonds over. (Cream cheese
     will do in a pinch. If the Camembert isn't creamy enough, mash it
     with some sweet cream.)


 Three-in-One Mold

3/4 cup cream cheese
1/2 cup grated American Cheddar cheese
1/2 cup Roquefort cheese, crumbled
2 tablespoons gelatin, dissolved and stirred into
1/2 cup boiling water
Juice of 1 lemon
Salt
Pepper
2 cups cream, beaten stiff
1/2 cup minced chives

     Mash the cheeses together, season gelatin liquid with lemon, salt
     and pepper and stir into cheese with the whipped cream. Add
     chives last Put in ring mold or any mold you fancy, chill well
     and slice at table to serve on lettuce with a little mayonnaise,
     or plain.


 Swiss Cheese Salad

     Dice 1/2 pound of cheese into 1/2-inch cubes. Slice one onion
     very thin. Mix well in a soup plate. Dash with German mustard,
     olive oil, wine vinegar, Worcestershire sauce. Salt lightly and
     grind in plenty of black pepper. Then stir, preferably with a
     wooden spoon so you won't mash the cheese, until every hole is
     drenched with the dressing.


 Rosie's Swiss Breakfast Cheese Salad

Often Emmentaler is cubed in a salad for breakfast, relished specially
by males on the morning after. We quote the original recipe brought
over by Rosie from the Swiss Tyrol to thrill the writers' and artists'
colony of Ridgefield, New Jersey, in her brother Emil's White House
Inn:

     First Rosie cut a thick slice of prime imported Emmentaler into
     half-inch cubes. Then she mixed imported French olive oil, German
     mustard and Swiss white wine vinegar with salt and freshly ground
     pepper in a deep soup plate, sprinkled on a few drops of pepper
     sauce scattered in the chunks of Schweizer and stirred the cubes
     with a light hand, using a wooden fork and spoon to prevent
     bruising.

     The salad was ready to eat only when each and every tiny, shiny
     cell of the Swiss from the homeland had been washed, oiled and
     polished with the soothing mixture.

     "Drink down the juice, too, when you have finished mine Breakfast
     Cheese Salad," Rosie advised the customers. "It is the best cure
     in the world for the worst hangover."


 Gorgonzola and Banana Salad

     Slice bananas lengthwise, as for a banana split. Sprinkle with
     lemon juice and spread with creamy Gorgonzola. Sluice with French
     dressing made with lemon juice in place of vinegar, to help bring
     out the natural banana flavor of ripe Gorgonzola.


 Cheese and Pea Salad

     Cube 1/2 pound of American Cheddar and mix with a can of peas, 1
     cup of diced celery, 1 cup of mayonnaise, 1/2 cup of sour cream,
     and 2 tablespoons each of minced pimientos and sweet pickles.
     Serve in lettuce cups with a sprinkling of parsley and chopped
     radishes.


 Apple and Cheese Salad

1/2 cup cream cheese
1 cup chopped pecans
Salt and pepper
Apples, sliced 1/2-inch thick
Lettuce leaves
Creamy salad dressing

     Make tiny seasoned cheese balls, center on the apple slices
     standing on lettuce leaves, and sluice with creamy salad
     dressing.


 Roquefort Cheese Salad Dressing

     No cheese sauce is easier to make than the American favorite of
     Roquefort cheese mashed with a fork and mixed with French
     dressing. It is often made in a pint Mason jar and kept in the
     refrigerator to shake up on occasion and toss over lettuce or
     other salads.

Unfortunately, even when the Roquefort is the French import, complete
with the picture of the sheep in red, and _garanti véritable_, the
dressing is often ruined by bad vinegar and cottonseed oil (of all
things). When bottled to sell in stores, all sorts of extraneous
spice, oils and mustard flour are used where nothing more is necessary
than the manipulation of a fork, fine olive oil and good
vinegar--white wine, tarragon or malt. Some ardent amateurs must have
their splash of Worcestershire sauce or lemon juice with salt and
pepper. This Roquefort dressing is good on all green salads, but on
endive it's something special.


 SAUCE MORNAY

Sauce Mornay has been hailed internationally as "the greatest culinary
achievement in cheese."

     Nothing is simpler to make. All you do is prepare a white sauce
     (the French Sauce Béchamel) and add grated Parmesan to your
     liking, stirring it in until melted and the sauce is creamy. This
     can be snapped up with cayenne or minced parsley, and when used
     with fish a little of the cooking broth is added.


 PLAIN CHEESE SAUCE

1 part of any grated cheese to 4 parts of white sauce

     This is a mild sauce that is nice with creamed or hard-cooked
     eggs. When the cheese content is doubled, 2 parts of cheese to 4
     of white sauce, it is delicious on boiled cauliflower, baked
     potatoes, macaroni and crackers soaked in milk.

     The sauce may be made richer by mixing melted butter with the
     flour in making the white sauce, or by beating egg yolk in with
     the cheese.

From thin to medium to thick it serves divers purposes:

_Thin_: it may be used instead of milk to make a tasty milk toast,
sometimes spiced with curry.

_Medium_: for baking by pouring over crackers soaked in milk.

_Thick_: serves as a sort of Welsh Rabbit when poured generously over
bread toasted on one side only, with the untoasted side up, to let the
sauce sink in.


 PARSLEYED CHEESE SAUCE

     This makes a mild, pleasantly pungent sauce, to enliven the
     cabbage family--hot cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage and Brussels
     sprouts. Croutons help when sprinkled over.


CORNUCOPIA OF CHEESE RECIPES


Since this is the Complete Book of Cheese we will fill a bounteous
cornucopia here with more or less essential, if not indispensable,
recipes and dishes not so easy to classify, or overlooked or crowded
out of the main sections devoted to the classic Fondues, Rabbits,
Soufflés, etc.


_Stuffed Celery, Endive, Anise and Other Suitable Stalks_

Use any soft cheese you like, or firm cheese softened by pressing
through a sieve; at room temperature, of course, with any seasoning or
relish.

     SUGGESTIONS:

     Cream cheese and chopped chives, pimientos, olives, or all three,
     with or without a touch of Worcestershire.

     Cottage cheese and piccalilli or chili sauce.

     Sharp Cheddar mixed with mayonnaise, mustard, cream, minced
     capers, pickles, or minced ham.

     Roquefort and other Blues are excellent fillings for your
     favorite vegetable stalk, or scooped-out dill pickle. This last
     is specially nice when filled with snappy cheese creamed with
     sweet butter.

     All canapé butters are ideally suited to stuffing stalks.
     Pineapple cheese, especially that part close to the
     pineapple-flavored rind, is perfect when creamed.

     A masterpiece in the line of filled stalks: Cut the leafy tops
     off an entire head of celery, endive, anise or anything similarly
     suitable. Wash and separate stalks, but keep them in order, to
     reassemble in the head after each is stuffed with a different
     mixture, using any of the above, or a tangy mix of your own
     concoction.

     After all stalks are filled, beginning with the baby center ones,
     press them together in the form of the original head, tie tight,
     and chill. When ready, slice in rolls about 8-inch thick and
     arrange as a salad on a bed of water cress or lettuce, moistened
     with French dressing.


 Cold Dunking

     Besides hot dunking in Swiss Fondue, cold dunking may be had by
     moistening plenty of cream cheese with cream or lemon in a
     dunking bowl. When the cheese is sufficiently liquefied, it is
     liberally seasoned with chopped parsley, chives, onions, pimiento
     and/or other relish. Then a couple of tins of anchovies are
     macerated and stirred in, oil and all.


 Cheese Charlotte

     Line a baking dish from bottom to top with decrusted slices of
     bread dipped in milk. Cream 1 tablespoon of sweet butter with 2
     eggs and season before stirring in 2 cups of grated cheese. Bake
     until golden brown in slow oven.


 Straws

     Roll pastry dough thin and cover with grated Cheddar, fold and
     roll at least twice more, sprinkling with cheese each time. Chill
     dough in refrigerator and cut in straw-size strips. Stiffly salt
     a beaten egg yolk and glaze with that to give a salty taste. Bake
     for several minutes until crisp.


 Supa Shetgia[B]

[Footnote B: (from _Cheese Cookery_, by Helmut Ripperger)]

     _This is the famous cheese soup of the Engadine and little known
     in this country. One of its seasonings is nutmeg and until one
     has used it in cheese dishes, it is hard to describe how
     perfectly it gives that extra something. The recipe, as given,
     is for each plate, but there is no reason why the old-fashioned
     tureen could not be used and the quantities simply increased_.

     Put a slice of stale French bread, toasted or not, into a soup
     plate and cover it with 4 tablespoons of grated or shredded Swiss
     cheese. Place another slice of bread on top of this and pour over
     it some boiling milk. Cover the plate and let it stand for
     several minutes. Season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Serve
     topped with browned, hot butter. Use whole nutmeg and grate it
     freshly.


WITH A CHEESE SHAKER ON THE TABLE


Italians are so dependent on cheese to enrich all their dishes, from
soups to spaghetti--and indeed any vegetable--that a shaker of grated
Parmesan, Romano or reasonable substitute stands ready at every table,
or is served freshly grated on a side dish. Thus any Italian soup
might be called a cheese soup, but we know of only one, the great
minestrone, in which cheese is listed as an indispensable ingredient
along with the pasta, peas, onion, tomatoes, kidney beans, celery,
olive oil, garlic, oregano, potatoes, carrots, and so forth.

Likewise, a chunk of melting or toasting cheese is essential in the
Fritto Misto, the finest mixed grill we know, and it's served up as a
separate tidbit with the meats.

Italians grate on more cheese for seasoning than any other people, as
the French are wont to use more wine in cooking.


 Pfeffernüsse and Caraway

The gingery little "pepper nuts," _pfeffernüsse_, imported from
Germany in barrels at Christmastime, make one of the best
accompaniments to almost any kind of cheese. For contrast try a dish
of caraway.


 Diablotins

Small rounds of buttered bread or toast heaped with a mound of grated
cheese and browned in the oven is a French contribution.


CHEESE OMELETS


 Cheddar Omelet

     Make a plain omelet your own way. When the mixture has just begun
     to cook, dust over it evenly 1/2 cup grated Cheddar.
     (a) Use young Cheddar if you want a mild, bland omelet
     (b) Use sharp, aged Cheddar for a full-flavored one.
     (c) Sprinkle (b) with Worcestershire sauce to make what might be
     called a Wild Omelet.
     Cook as usual. Fold and serve.


 Parmesan Omelet (mild)

     Cook as above, but use 1/4 cup only of Parmesan, grated fine, in
     place of the 1/2 cup Cheddar.


 Parmesan Omelet (full flavored)

     As above, but use 1/2 cup Parmesan, finely grated, as follows:
     Sift 1/4 cup of the Parmesan into your egg mixture at the
     beginning and dust on the second 1/4 cup evenly, just as the
     omelet begins to set.


 A Meal-in-One Omelet

     Fry 1/2 dozen bacon slices crisp and keep hot while frying a cup
     of diced, boiled potatoes in the bacon fat, to equal crispness.
     Meanwhile make your omelet mixture of 3 eggs, beaten, and 1-1/2
     tablespoons of shredded Emmentaler (or domestic Swiss) with 1
     tablespoon of chopped chives and salt and pepper to taste.


 Tomato and

     Make plain omelet, cover with thin rounds of fresh tomato and
     dust well with any grated cheese you like. Put under broiler
     until cheese melts to a golden brown.


 Omelet with Cheese Sauce

     Make a plain French, fluffy or puffy omelet and when finished,
     cover with a hot, seasoned, reinforced white sauce in which 1/4
     pound of shredded cheese has been melted, and mixed well with 1/2
     cup cooked, diced celery and 1 tablespoon of pimiento, minced.

The French use grated Gruyère for this with all sorts of sauces, such
as the _Savoyar de Savoie_, with potatoes, chervil, tarragon and
cream. A delicious appearance and added flavor can be had by browning
with a salamander.


 Spanish Flan--Quesillo

FOR THE CARAMEL:
1/2 cup sugar
4 tablespoons water

FOR THE FLAN:
4 eggs, beaten separately
2 cups hot milk
1/2 cup sugar
Salt

     Brown sugar and mix with water to make the caramel. Pour it into
     a baking mold.

     Make Flan by mixing together all the ingredients. Add to
     carameled mold and bake in pan of water in moderate oven about
     3/4 hour.


 Italian Fritto Misto

     The distinctive Italian Mixed Fry, Fritto Misto, is made with
     whatever fish, sweetbreads, brains, kidneys, or tidbits of meat
     are at hand, say a half dozen different cubes of meat and
     giblets, with as many hearts of artichokes, _finocchi_, tomato,
     and different vegetables as you can find, but always with a hunk
     of melting cheese, to fork out in golden threads with each
     mouthful of the mixture.


 Polish Piroghs (a pocketful of cheese)

     Make noodle dough with 2 eggs and 2 cups of flour, roll out very
     thin and cut in 2-inch squares.

     Cream a cupful of cottage cheese with a tablespoon of melted
     butter, flavor with cinnamon and toss in a handful of seedless
     currents.

     Fill pastry squares with this and pinch edges tight together to
     make little pockets.

     Drop into a lot of fast-boiling water, lightly salted, and boil
     steadily 30 minutes, lowering the heat so the pockets won't burst
     open.

     Drain and serve on a piping hot platter with melted butter and a
     sprinkling of bread crumbs.

     This is a cross between ravioli and blintzes.


 Cheesed Mashed Potatoes

     Whip into a steaming hot dish of creamily mashed potatoes some
     old Cheddar with melted butter and a crumbling of crisp, cooked
     bacon.


If there's a chafing dish handy, a first-rate nightcap can be made via a

 Sautéed Swiss Sandwich

     Tuck a slice of Swiss cheese between two pieces of thickly
     buttered bread, trim crusts, cut sandwich in two, surround it
     with one well-beaten egg, slide it into sizzling butter and fry
     on both sides. A chef at the New York Athletic Club once improved
     on this by first sandwiching the Swiss between a slice of ham and
     a slice of chicken breast, then beating up a brace of eggs with a
     jigger of heavy sweet cream and soaking his sandwich in this
     until it sopped up every drop. A final frying in sweet butter
     made strong men cry for it.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Ten_

Appetizers, Crackers, Sandwiches, Savories,
Snacks, Spreads and Toasts


In America cheese got its start in country stores in our
cracker-barrel days when every man felt free to saunter in, pick up
the cheese knife and cut himself a wedge from the big-bellied rattrap
cheese standing under its glass bell or wire mesh hood that kept the
flies off but not the free-lunchers. Cheese by itself being none too
palatable, the taster would saunter over to the cracker barrel, shoo
the cat off and help himself to the old-time crackers that can't be
beat today.

At that time Wisconsin still belonged to the Indians and Vermont was
our leading cheese state, with its Sage and Cheddar and Vermont
Country Store Crackers, as Vrest Orton of Weston Vermont, calls them.
When Orton heard we were writing this book, he sent samples from the
store his father started in 1897 which is still going strong. Together
with the Vermont Good Old-fashioned Natural Cheese and the Sage came a
handy handmade Cracker Basket, all wicker, ten crackers long and just
one double cracker wide. A snug little casket for those puffy,
old-time, two-in-one soda biscuits that have no salt to spoil the
taste of the accompanying cheese. Each does double duty because it's
made to split in the middle, so you can try one kind of cheese on one
half and another on t'other, or sandwich them between.

Some Pied Piper took the country cheese and crackers to the corner
saloon and led a free-lunch procession that never faltered till
Prohibition came. The same old store cheese was soon pepped up as
saloon cheese with a saucer of caraway seeds, bowls of pickles,
peppers, pickled peppers and rye bread with plenty of mustard,
pretzels or cheese straws, smearcase and schwarzbrot. Beer and cheese
forever together, as in the free-lunch ditty of that great day:

    I am an Irish hunter;
    I am, I ain't.
    I do not hunt for deer
    But beer.
    Oh, Otto, wring the bar rag.

    I do not hunt for fleas
    But cheese.
    Oh, Adolph, bring the free lunch.

It was there and then that cheese came of age from coast to coast. In
every bar there was a choice of Swiss, Cottage, Limburger--manly
cheeses, walkie-talkie oldsters that could sit up and beg, golden
yellow, tangy mellow, always cut in cubes. Cheese takes the cube form
as naturally as eggs take the oval and honeycombs the hexagon.

On the more elegant handout buffets, besides the shapely cubes, free
Welsh Rabbit started at four every afternoon, to lead the tired
businessman in by the nose; or a smear of Canadian Snappy out of a
pure white porcelain pot in the classy places, on a Bent's water
biscuit.


SANDWICHES AND SAVORY SNACKS

Next to nibbling cheese with crackers and appetizers, of which there
is no end in sight, cheese sandwiches help us consume most of our
country's enormous output of Brick, Cheddar and Swiss. To attempt to
classify and describe all of these would be impossible, so we will
content ourselves by picking a few of the cold and hot, the plain and
the fancy, the familiar and the exotic. Let's use the alphabet to sum
up the situation.


A Alpine Club Sandwich

     Spread toasts with mayonnaise and fill with a thick slice of
     imported Emmentaler, well-mustarded and seasoned, and the usual
     club-sandwich toppings of thin slices of chicken or turkey,
     tomato, bacon and a lettuce leaf.


B Boston Beany, Open-face

     Lightly butter a slice of Boston brown bread, cover it generously
     with hot baked beans and a thick layer of shredded Cheddar. Top
     with bacon and put under a slow broiler until cheese melts and
     the bacon crisps.


C Cheeseburgers

     Pat out some small seasoned hamburgers exceedingly thin and,
     using them instead of slices of bread, sandwich in a nice slice
     of American Cheddar well covered with mustard. Crimp edges of the
     hamburgers all around to hold in the cheese when it melts and
     begins to run. Toast under a brisk boiler and serve on soft,
     toasted sandwich buns.


D Deviled Rye

     Butter flat Swedish rye bread and heat quickly in hot oven. Cool
     until crisp again. Then spread thickly with cream cheese,
     bedeviled with catsup, paprika or pimiento.


E Egg, Open-faced

     Sauté minced small onion and small green pepper in 2 tablespoons
     of butter and make a sauce by cooking with a cup of canned
     tomatoes. Season and reduce to about half. Fry 4 eggs and put one
     in the center of each of 4 pieces of hot toast spread with the
     red sauce. Sprinkle each generously with grated Cheddar, broil
     until melted and serve with crisp bacon.


F French-fried Swiss

     Simply make a sandwich with a noble slice of imported Gruyère,
     soak it in beaten egg and milk and fry slowly till cheese melts
     and the sandwich is nicely browned. This is a specialty of
     Franche-Comté.


G Grilled Chicken-Ham-Cheddar

     Cut crusts from 2 slices of white bread and butter them on both
     sides. Make a sandwich of these with 1 slice cooked chicken, 1/2
     slice sharp Cheddar cheese, and a sprinkling of minced ham.
     Fasten tight with toothpicks, cut in half and dip thoroughly in a
     mixture of egg and milk. Grill golden on both sides and serve
     with lengthwise slices of dill pickle.


H He-man Sandwich, Open-faced

     Butter a thick slice of dark rye bread, cover with a layer of
     mashed cold baked beans and a slice of ham, then one of Swiss
     cheese and a wheel of Bermuda onion topped with mustard and a
     sowing of capers.


I International Sandwich

     Split English muffins and toast on the hard outsides, cover soft,
     untoasted insides with Swiss cheese, spread lightly with mustard,
     top that with a wheel of Bermuda onion and 1 or 2 slices of
     Italian-type tomato. Season with cayenne and salt, dot with
     butter, cover with Brazil nuts and brown under the broiler.


J Jurassiennes, or Croûtes Comtoises

     Soak slices of stale buns in milk, cover with a mixture of onion
     browned in chopped lean bacon and mixed with grated Gruyère.
     Simmer until cheese melts, and serve.


K Kümmelkäse

     If you like caraway flavor this is your sandwich: On
     well-buttered but lightly mustarded rye, lay a thickish slab of
     Milwaukee Kümmelkäse, which translates caraway cheese. For good
     measure sprinkle caraway seeds on top, or serve them in a saucer
     on the side. Then dash on a splash of kümmel, the caraway liqueur
     that's best when imported.


L Limburger Onion or Limburger Catsup

     Marinate slices of Bermuda onion in a peppery French dressing for
     1/2 hour. Then butter slices of rye, spread well with soft
     Limburger, top with onion and you will have something
     super-duper--if you like Limburger.

     When catsup is substituted for marinated onion the sandwich has
     quite another character and flavor, so true Limburger addicts
     make one of each and take alternate bites for the thrill of
     contrast.


M Meringue, Open-faced (from the Browns' _10,000 Snacks_)

     Allow 1 egg and 4 tablespoons of grated cheese to 1 slice of
     bread. Toast bread on one side only, spread butter on untoasted
     side, put 2 tablespoons grated cheese over butter, and the yolk
     of an egg in the center. Beat egg white stiff with a few grains
     of salt and pile lightly on top. Sprinkle the other 2 tablespoons
     of grated cheese over that and bake in moderate oven until the
     egg white is firm and the cheese has melted to a golden-brown.


N Neufchâtel and Honey

     We know no sandwich more ethereal than one made with thin,
     decrusted, white bread, spread with sweet butter, then with
     Neufchâtel topped with some fine honey--Mount Hymettus, if
     possible.

     Any creamy Petit Suisse will do as well as the Neufchâtel, but
     nothing will take the place of the honey to make this heavenly
     sandwich that must have been the original ambrosia.


O Oskar's Ham-Cam

     Oskar Davidsen of Copenhagen, whose five-foot menu lists 186
     superb sandwiches and snacks, each with a character all its own,
     perfected the Ham-Cam base for a flock of fancy ham sandwiches,
     open-faced on rye or white, soft or crisp, sweet or sour, almost
     any one-way slice you desire. He uses as many contrasting kinds
     of bread as possible, and his butter varies from salt to fresh
     and whipped. The Ham-Cam base involves "a juicy, tender slice of
     freshly boiled, mild-cured ham" with imported Camembert spread on
     the ham as thick as velvet.

     The Ham-Cam is built up with such splendors as "goose liver
     paste and Madeira wine jelly," "fried calves' kidney and
     _rémoulade_," "Bombay curry salad," "bird's liver and fried egg,"
     "a slice of red roast beef" and more of that red Madeira jelly,
     with anything else you say, just so long as it does credit to
     Camembert on ham.


P Pickled Camembert

     Butter a thin slice of rye or pumpernickel and spread with ripe
     imported Camembert, when in season (which isn't summer). Make a
     mixture of sweet, sour and dill pickles, finely chopped, and
     spread it on. Top this with a thin slice of white bread for
     pleasing contrast with the black.


Q Queijo da Serra Sandwich

     On generous rounds of French "flute" or other crunchy, crusty
     white bread place thick portions of any good Portuguese cheese
     made of sheep's milk "in the mountains." This last translates
     back into Queijo da Serra, the fattest, finest cheese in the
     world--on a par with fine Greek Feta. Bead the open-faced creamy
     cheese lightly with imported capers, and you'll say it's
     scrumptious.


R Roquefort Nut

     Butter hot toast and cover with a thickish slice of genuine
     Roquefort cheese. Sprinkle thickly with genuine Hungarian
     paprika. Put in moderate oven for about 6 minutes. Finish it off
     with chopped pine nuts, almonds, or a mixture thereof.


S Smoky Sandwich and Sturgeon-smoked Sandwich

     Skin some juicy little, jolly little sprats, lay on thin rye, or
     a slice of miniature-loaf rye studded with caraway, spread with
     sweet butter and cover with a slice of smoked cheese.

     Hickory is preferred for most of the smoking in America. In New
     York the best smoked cheese, whether from Canada or nearer home,
     is usually cured in the same room with sturgeon. Since this king
     of smoked fish imparts some of its regal savor to the Cheddar,
     there is a natural affinity peculiarly suited to sandwiching as
     above.

     Smoked salmon, eel, whitefish or any other, is also good with
     cheese smoked with hickory or anything with a salubrious savor,
     while a sandwich of smoked turkey with smoked cheese is out of
     this world. We accompany it with a cup of smoky Lapsang Soochong
     China tea.


T Tangy Sandwich

     On buttered rye spread cream cheese, and on this bed lay thinly
     sliced dried beef. In place of mustard dot the beef with
     horseradish and pearl onions or those reliable old chopped
     chives. And by the way, if you must use mustard on every cheese
     sandwich, try different kinds for a change: sharp English freshly
     mixed by your own hand out of the tin of powder, or Dijon for a
     French touch.


U Unusual Sandwich--of Flowers, Hay and Clover

     On a sweet-buttered slice of French white bread lay a layer of
     equally sweet English Flower cheese (made with petals of rose,
     marigold, violet, etc.) and top that with French Fromage de foin.
     This French hay cheese gets its name from being ripened on hay
     and holds its new-mown scent. Sprinkle on a few imported capers
     (the smaller they are, the better), with a little of the luscious
     juice, and dust lightly with Sapsago.


V Vegetarian Sandwich

     Roll your own of alternate leaves of lettuce, slices of store
     cheese, avocados, cream cheese sprinkled heavily with chopped
     chives, and anything else in the Vegetable or Caseous Kingdoms
     that suits your fancy.


W Witch's Sandwich

     Butter 2 slices of sandwich bread, cover one with a thin slice of
     imported Emmentaler, dash with cayenne and a drop or two of
     tabasco. Slap on a sizzling hot slice of grilled ham and press it
     together with the cheese between the two bread slices, put in a
     hot oven and serve piping hot with a handful of
     "moonstones"--those outsize pearl onions.


X Xochomilco Sandwich

     In spite of the "milco" in Xochomilco, there isn't a drop to be
     had that's native to the festive, floating gardens near Mexico
     City. For there, instead of the cow, a sort of century plant
     gives milky white _pulque_, the fermented juice of this
     cactuslike desert plant. With this goes a vegetable cheese curded
     by its own vegetable rennet. It's called tuna cheese, made from
     the milky juice of the prickly pear that grows on yet another
     cactuslike plant of the dry lands. This tuna cheese sometimes
     teams up in arid lands with the juicy thick cactus leaf sliced
     into a tortilla sandwich. The milky _pulque_ of Xochomilco goes
     as well with it as beer with a Swiss cheese sandwich.


 Y Yolk Picnic Sandwich

     Hard-cooked egg yolk worked into a yellow paste with cream
     cheese, mustard, olive oil, lemon juice, celery salt and a touch
     of tabasco, spread on thick slices of whole wheat bread.


Z Zebra

     Take a tip from Oskar over in Copenhagen and design your own
     Zebra sandwich as decoratively as one of those oft-photoed skins
     in El Morocco. Just alternate stripes of black bread with various
     white cheeses in between, to follow, the black and white zebra
     pattern.

For good measure we will toss in a couple of toasted cheese
sandwiches.


 Toasted Cheese Sandwich

     Butter both sides of 2 thick slices of white bread and sandwich
     between them a seasoned mixture of shredded sharp cheese, egg
     yolk, mustard and chopped chives, together with stiffly beaten
     egg white folded in last to make a light filling. Fry the
     buttered sandwich in more butter until well melted and nicely
     gilded.

This toasted cheeser is so good it's positively sinful. The French,
who outdo us in both cooking and sin, make one of their own in the
form of fried fingers of stale bread doused in an 'arf and 'arf Welsh
Rabbit and Fondue melting of Gruyère, that serves as a liaison to
further sandwich the two.

Garlic is often used in place of chopped chives, and in contrast to
this wild one there's a mild one made of Dutch cream cheese by the
equally Dutch Pennsylvanians.

England, of course, together with Wales, holds all-time honors with
such celebrated regional "toasting cheeses" as Devonshire and Dunlop.
Even British Newfoundland is known for its simple version, that's
quite as pleasing as its rich Prince Edward Island Oyster Stew.


 Newfoundland Toasted Cheese Sandwich

1 pound grated Cheddar
1 egg, well beaten
1/2 cup milk
1 tablespoon butter

     Heat together and pour over well-buttered toast.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Eleven_

"Fit for Drink"


    A country without a fit drink for cheese has no cheese fit for
    drink.


Greece was the first country to prove its epicurean fitness, according
to the old saying above, for it had wine to tipple and sheep's milk
cheese to nibble. The classical Greek cheese has always been Feta, and
no doubt this was the kind that Circe combined most suitably with wine
to make a farewell drink for her lovers. She put further sweetness and
body into the stirrup cup by stirring honey and barley meal into it.
Today we might whip this up in an electric mixer to toast her memory.

While a land flowing with milk and honey is the ideal of many, France,
Italy, Spain or Portugal, flowing with wine and honey, suit a lot of
gourmets better. Indeed, in such vinous-caseous places cheese is on
the house at all wine sales for prospective customers to snack upon
and thus bring out the full flavor of the cellared vintages. But
professional wine tasters are forbidden any cheese between sips. They
may clear their palates with plain bread, but nary a crumb of
Roquefort or cube of Gruyère in working hours, lest it give the wine a
spurious nobility.

And, speaking of Roquefort, Romanée has the closest affinity for it.
Such affinities are also found in Pont l'Evêque and Beaujolais, Brie
and red champagne, Coulommiers and any good _vin rosé_. Heavenly
marriages are made in Burgundy between red and white wines of both
Côtes, de Nuits and de Baune, and Burgundian cheeses such as Epoisses,
Soumaintarin and Saint-Florentin. Pommard and Port-Salut seem to be
made for each other, as do Château Margaux and Camembert.

A great cheese for a great wine is the rule that brings together in
the neighboring provinces such notables as Sainte Maure, Valençay,
Vendôme and the Loire wines--Vouvray, Saumur and Anjou. Gruyère mates
with Chablis, Camembert with St. Emilion; and any dry red wine, most
commonly claret, is a fit drink for the hundreds of other fine French
cheeses.

Every country has such happy marriages, an Italian standard being
Provolone and Chianti. Then there is a most unusual pair, French
Neufchâtel cheese and Swiss Neuchâtel wine from just across the
border. Switzerland also has another cheese favorite at home--Trauben
(grape cheese), named from the Neuchâtel wine in which it is aged.

One kind of French Neufchâtel cheese, Bondon, is also uniquely suited
to the company of any good wine because it is made in the exact shape
and size of a wine barrel bung. A similar relation is found in Brinzas
(or Brindzas) that are packed in miniature wine barrels, strongly
suggesting what should be drunk with such excellent cheeses: Hungarian
Tokay. Other foreign cheeses go to market wrapped in vine leaves. The
affinity has clearly been laid down in heaven.

Only the English seem to have a _fortissimo_ taste in the go-with
wines, according to these matches registered by André Simon in _The
Art of Good Living:_

Red Cheshire with Light Tawny Port
White Cheshire with Oloroso Sherry
Blue Leicester with Old Vintage Port
Green Roquefort with New Vintage Port

To these we might add brittle chips of Greek Casere with nips of
Amontillado, for an eloquent appetizer.

The English also pour port into Stilton, and sundry other wines and
liquors into Cheddars and such. This doctoring leads to fraudulent
imitation, however, for either port or stout is put into counterfeit
Cheshire cheese to make up for the richness it lacks.

While some combinations of cheeses and wines may turn out palatable,
we prefer taking ours straight. When something more fiery is needed we
can twirl the flecks of pure gold in a chalice of Eau de Vie de Danzig
and nibble on legitimate Danzig cheese unadulterated. _Goldwasser_, or
Eau de Vie, was a favorite liqueur of cheese-loving Franklin
Roosevelt, and we can be sure he took the two separately.

Another perfect combination, if you can take it, is imported kümmel
with any caraway-seeded cheese, or cream cheese with a handy saucer of
caraway seeds. In the section of France devoted to gin, the juniper
berries that flavor the drink also go into a local cheese, Fromage
Fort. This is further fortified with brandy, white wine and pepper.
One regional tipple with such brutally strong cheese is black coffee
laced with gin.

French la Jonchée is another potted thriller with not only coffee and
rum mixed in during the making, but orange flower water, too. Then
there is la Petafina, made with brandy and absinthe; Hazebrook with
brandy alone; and la Cachat with white wine and brandy.

In Italy white Gorgonzola is also put up in crocks with brandy. In
Oporto the sharp cheese of that name is enlivened by port, Cider and
the greatest of applejacks, Calvados, seem made to go the regional
Calvados cheese. This is also true of our native Jersey Lightning and
hard cider with their accompanying New York State cheese. In the Auge
Valley of France, farmers also drink homemade cider with their own
Augelot, a piquant kind of Pont l'Evêque.

The English sip pear cider (perry) with almost any British cheese.
Milk would seem to be redundant, but Sage cheese and buttermilk do go
well together.

Wine and cheese have other things in common. Some wines and some
cheeses are aged in caves, and there are vintage cheeses no less than
vintage wines, as is the case with Stilton.




[Illustration]

_Chapter Twelve_

Lazy Lou


Once, so goes the sad story, there was a cheesemonger unworthy of his
heritage. He exported a shipload of inferior "Swiss" made somewhere
in the U.S.A. Bad to begin with, it had worsened on the voyage.
Rejected by the health authorities on the other side, it was shipped
back, reaching home in the unhappy condition known as "cracked." To
cut his losses the rascally cheesemonger had his cargo ground up and
its flavor disguised with hot peppers and chili sauce. Thus there
came into being the abortion known as the "cheese spread."

The cheese spread or "food" and its cousin, the processed cheese, are
handy, cheap and nasty. They are available everywhere and some people
even like them. So any cheese book is bound to take formal notice of
their existence. I have done so--and now, an unfond farewell to them.

My academic cheese education began at the University of Wisconsin in
1904. I grew up with our great Midwest industry; I have read with
profit hundreds of pamphlets put out by the learned Aggies of my Alma
Mater. Mostly they treat of honest, natural cheeses: the making,
keeping and enjoying of authentic Longhorn Cheddars, short Bricks and
naturalized Limburgers.

At the School of Agriculture the students still, I am told, keep
their hand in by studying the classical layout on a cheese board. One
booklet recommends the following for freshman contemplation:

    CARAWAY BRICK      SELECT BRICK            EDAM
    WISCONSIN SWISS    LONGHORN AMERICAN       SHEFFORD

These six sturdy samples of Wisconsin's best will stimulate any
amount of classroom discussion. Does the Edam go better with
German-American black bread or with Swedish Ry-Krisp? To butter or
not to butter? And if to butter, with which cheese? Salt or sweet?
How close do we come to the excellence of the genuine Alpine Swiss?
Primary school stuff, but not unworthy of thought.

Pass on down the years. You are now ready to graduate. Your cheese
board can stand a more sophisticated setup. Try two boards; play the
teams against each other.

                       The All-American Champs

NEW YORK COON            PHILADELPHIA CREAM      OHIO LIEDERKRANZ
VERMONT SAGE             KENTUCKY TRAPPIST       WISCONSIN LIMBURGER
            CALIFORNIA JACK                      PINEAPPLE
            MINNESOTA BLUE
                                                 BRICK
                             TILLAMOOK

                                VS.

                         The European Giants

PORTUGUESE TRAZ-           DUTCH GOUDA              ITALIAN PARMESAN
OS-MONTES                  FRENCH ROQUEFORT         SWISS EMMENTALER
YUGOSLAVIAN KACKAVALJ
         ENGLISH STILTON                      DANISH BLUE
GERMAN MÜNSTER                                GREEK FETA
                               HABLÉ

The postgraduate may play the game using as counters the great and
distinctive cheeses of more than fifty countries. Your Scandinavian
board alone, just to give an idea of the riches available, will shine
with blues, yellows, whites, smoky browns, and chocolates
representing Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland, Iceland and Lapland.

For the Britisher only blue-veined Stilton is worthy to crown the
banquet. The Frenchman defends Roquefort, the Dane his own regal
Blue; the Swiss sticks to Emmentaler before, during and after all
three meals. You may prefer to finish with a delicate Brie, a smoky
slice of Provolone, a bit of Baby Gouda, or some Liptauer Garniert,
about which more later.

We load them all on Lazy Lou, Lazy Susan's big twin brother, a giant
roulette wheel of cheese, every number a winner. A second Lazy Lou
will bear the savories and go-withs. For these tidbits the English
have a divine genius; think of the deviled shrimps, smoked oysters,
herring roe on toast, snips of broiled sausage ... But we will make
do with some olives and radishes, a few pickles, nuts, capers. With
our two trusty Lazy Lous on hand plus wine or beer, we can easily
dispense with the mere dinner itself.

Perhaps it is an Italian night. Then Lazy Lou is happily burdened
with imported Latticini; Incanestrato, still bearing the imprint of
its wicker basket; Pepato, which is but Incanestrato peppered; Mel
Fina; deep-yellow, buttery Scanno with its slightly burned flavor;
tangy Asiago; Caciocavallo, so called because the the cheeses, tied
in pairs and hung over a pole, look as though they were sitting in a
saddle--cheese on horseback, or "_cacio a cavallo_." Then we ring in
Lazy Lou's first assistant, an old, silver-plated, revolving
Florentine magnum-holder. It's designed to spin a gigantic flask of
Chianti. The flick of a finger and the bottle is before you. Gently
pull it down and hold your glass to the spout.

True, imported wines and cheeses are expensive. But native American
products and reasonably edible imitations of the real thing are
available as substitutes. Anyway, protein for protein, a cheese party
will cost less than a steak barbecue. And it can be more fun.

Encourage your guests to contribute their own latest discoveries. One
may bring along as his ticket of admission a Primavera from Brazil;
another some cubes of an Andean specialty just flown in from
Colombia's mountain city, Mérida, and still wrapped in its aromatic
leaves of _Frailejón Lanudo_; another a few wedges of savory sweet
English Flower cheese, some flavored with rose petals, others with
marigolds; another a tube of South American Kräuterkäse.

Provide your own assortment of breads and try to include some of
those fat, flaky old-fashioned crackers that country stores in New
England can still supply. Mustard? Sure, if _.you_ like it. If you
want to be fancy, use a tricky little gadget put out by the Maille
condiment-makers in France and available here in the food specialty
shops. It's a miniature painter's palate holding five mustards of
different shades and flavors and two mustard paddles. The mustards,
in proper chromatic order, are: jonquil yellow "Strong Dijon"; "Green
Herbs"; brownish "Tarragon"; golden "Ora"; crimson "Tomato-flavored."

And, just to keep things moving, we have restored an antique whirling
cruet-holder to deliver Worcestershire sauce, soy sauce, A-1, Tap
Sauce and Major Grey's Chutney. Salt shakers and pepper mills are
handy, with a big-holed tin canister filled with crushed red-pepper
pods, chili powder, Hungarian-paprika and such small matters. Butter,
both sweet and salt, is on hand, together with, saucers or bowls of
curry, capers, chives (sliced, not chopped), minced onion, fresh mint
leaves, chopped pimientos, caraway, quartered lemons, parsley, fresh
tarragon, tomato slices, red and white radishes, green and black
olives, pearl onions and assorted nutmeats.

Some years ago, when I was collaborating with my mother, Cora, and my
wife, Rose, in writing _10,000 Snacks_ (which, by the way, devotes
nearly forty pages to cheeses), we staged a rather elaborate tasting
party just for the three of us. It took a two-tiered Lazy Lou to
twirl the load.

The eight wedges on the top round were English and French samples and
the lower one carried the rest, as follows:

    ENGLISH CHEDDAR  CHESHIRE     ENGLISH STILTON   CANADIAN CHEDDAR
                                                   (rum flavored)

    FRENCH MÜNSTER   FRENCH BRIE     FRENCH            FRENCH
                                   CAMEMBERT         ROQUEFORT

    SWISS SAPSAGO    SWISS GRUYERE   SWISS EDAM        DUTCH GOUDA

    ITALIAN          CZECH           ITALIAN           NORWEGIAN
    PROVOLONE        OSTIEPKI        GORGONZOLA        GJETOST

                      HUNGARIAN LIPTAUER

The tasting began with familiar English Cheddars, Cheshires and
Stiltons from the top row. We had cheese knives, scoops, graters,
scrapers and a regulation wire saw, but for this line of crumbly
Britishers fingers were best.

The Cheddar was a light, lemony-yellow, almost white, like our
best domestic "bar cheese" of old.

The Cheshire was moldy and milky, with a slightly fermented
flavor that brought up the musty dining room of Fleet Street's
Cheshire cheese and called for draughts of beer. The Stilton was
strong but mellow, as high in flavor as in price.

Only the rum-flavored Canadian Cheddar from Montreal (by courtesy
English) let us down. It was done up as fancy as a bridegroom in
waxed white paper and looked as smooth and glossy as a gardenia. But
there its beauty ended. Either the rum that flavored it wasn't up to
much or the mixture hadn't been allowed to ripen naturally.

The French Münster, however, was hearty, cheery, and better made than
most German Münster, which at that time wasn't being exported much by
the Nazis. The Brie was melting prime, the Camembert was so perfectly
matured we ate every scrap of the crust, which can't be done with
many American "Camemberts" or, indeed, with the dead, dry French ones
sold out of season. Then came the Roquefort, a regal cheese we voted
the best buy of the lot, even though it was the most expensive. A
plump piece, pleasantly unctuous but not greasy, sharp in scent,
stimulatingly bittersweet in taste--unbeatable. There is no American
pretender to the Roquefort throne. Ours is invariably chalky and
tasteless. That doesn't mean we have no good Blues. We have. But they
are not Roquefort.

The Sapsago or Kräuterkäse from Switzerland (it has been made in the
Canton of Glarus for over five hundred years) was the least expensive
of the lot. Well-cured and dry, it lent itself to grating and tasted
fine on an old-fashioned buttered soda cracker. Sapsago has its own
seduction, derived from the clover-leaf powder with which the curd is
mixed and which gives it its haunting flavor and spring-like
sage-green color.

Next came some truly great Swiss Gruyère, delicately rich, and nutty
enough to make us think of the sharp white wines to be drunk with it
at the source.

As for the Provolone, notable for the water-buffalo milk that makes
it, there's an example of really grown-up milk. Perfumed as spring
flowers drenched with a shower of Anjou, having a bouquet all its own
and a trace of a winelike kick, it made us vow never to taste another
American imitation. Only a smooth-cheeked, thick slab cut from a
pedigreed Italian Provolone of medium girth, all in one piece and
with no sign of a crack, satisfy the gourmet.

The second Italian classic was Gorgonzola, gorgeous Gorgonzola, as
fruity as apples, peaches and pears sliced together. It smells so
much like a ripe banana we often eat them together, plain or with the
crumbly _formaggio_ lightly forked into the fruit, split lengthwise.

After that the Edam tasted too lipsticky, like the red-paint job on
its rind, and the Gouda seemed only half-hearted. Both too obviously
ready-made for commerce with nothing individual or custom-made about
them, rolled or bounced over from Holland by the boat load.

The Ostiepki from Czechoslovakia might have been a link of smoked
ostrich sausage put up in the skin of its own red neck. In spite of
its pleasing lemon-yellow interior, we couldn't think of any use for
it except maybe crumbling thirty or forty cents' worth into a
ten-cent bowl of bean soup. But that seemed like a waste of money, so
we set it aside to try in tiny chunks on crackers as an appetizer
some other day, when it might be more appetizing.

We felt much the same about the chocolate-brown Norwegian Gjetost
that looked like a slab of boarding-school fudge and which had the
same cloying cling to the tongue. We were told by a native that our
piece was entirely too young. That's what made it so insipid,
undeveloped in texture and flavor. But the next piece we got turned
out to be too old and decrepit, and so strong it would have taken a
Paul Bunyan to stand up under it. When we complained to our expert
about the shock to our palates, he only laughed, pointing to the nail
on his little finger.

"You should take just a little bit, like that. A pill no bigger than
a couple of aspirins or an Alka-Seltzer. It's only in the morning you
take it when it's old and strong like this, for a pick-me-up, a cure
for a hangover, you know, like a prairie oyster well soused in
Worcestershire."

That made us think we might use it up to flavor a Welsh Rabbit,
_instead_ of the Worcestershire sauce, but we couldn't melt it with
anything less than a blowtorch.

To bring the party to a happy end, we went to town on the Hungarian
Liptauer, garnishing that fine, granulating buttery base after mixing
it well with some cream cheese. We mixed the mixed cheese with
sardine and tuna mashed together in a little of the oil from the can.
We juiced it with lemon, sluiced it with bottled sauces, worked in
the leftovers, some tarragon, mint, spicy seeds, parsley, capers and
chives. We peppered and paprikaed it, salted and spiced it, then
spread it thicker than butter on pumpernickel and went to it.
_That's_ Liptauer Garniert.




[Illustration: No. 4 Cheese Inc.]

_Appendix_

The A-B-Z of Cheese

_Each cheese is listed by its name and country of origin, with any
further information available. Unless otherwise indicated, the cheese
is made of cow's milk._


A

Aberdeen
_Scotland_

Soft; creamy mellow.

Abertam
_Bohemia_ _(Made near Carlsbad_)

Hard; sheep; distinctive, with a savory smack all its own.

Absinthe _see_ Petafina.

Acidophilus _see_ Saint-Ivel.

Aettekees
_Belgium_

November to May--winter-made and eaten.

Affiné, Carré _see_ Ancien Impérial.

Affumicata, Mozzarella _see_ Mozzarella.

After-dinner cheeses _see_ Chapter 8.

Agricultural school cheeses _see_ College-educated.

Aiguilles, Fromage d'
_Alpine France_

Named "Cheese of the Needles" from the sharp Alpine peaks of the
district where it is made.

Aizy, Cendrée d' _see_ Cendrée.

Ajacilo, Ajaccio
_Corsica_

Semihard; piquant; nut-flavor. Named after the chief city of French
Corsica where a cheese-lover, Napoleon, was born.

à la Crème _see_ Fromage, Fromage Blanc, Chevretons.

à la Main _see_ Vacherin.

à la Pie _see_ Fromage.

à la Rachette _see_ Bagnes.

Albini
_Northern Italy_

Semihard; made of both goat and cow milk; white, mellow,
pleasant-tasting table cheese.

Albula
_Switzerland_

Rich with the flavor of cuds of green herbs chewed into creamy milk
that makes tasty curds. Made in the fertile Swiss Valley of Albula
whose proud name it bears.

Alderney
_Channel Islands_

The French, who are fond of this special product of the very special
breed of cattle named after the Channel Island of Alderney, translate
it phonetically--Fromage d'Aurigny.

Alemtejo
_Portugal_

Called in full Queijo de Alemtejo, cheese of Alemtejo, in the same way
that so many French cheeses carry along the _fromage_ title. Soft;
sheep and sometimes goat or cow; in cylinders of three sizes, weighing
respectively about two ounces, one pound, and four pounds. The smaller
sizes are the ones most often made with mixed goat and sheep milk. The
method of curdling without the usual animal rennet is interesting and
unusual. The milk is warmed and curdled with vegetable rennet made
from the flowers of a local thistle, or cardoon, which is used in two
other Portuguese cheeses--Queijo da Cardiga and Queijo da Serra da
Estrella--and probably in many others not known beyond their locale.
In France la Caillebotte is distinguished for being clabbered with
_chardonnette_, wild artichoke seed. In Portugal, where there isn't so
much separating of the sheep from the goats, it takes several weeks
for Alemtejos to ripen, depending on the lactic content and difference
in sizes.

Alfalfa _see_ Sage.

Alise Saint-Reine
_France_

Soft; summer-made.

Allgäuer Bergkäse, Allgäuer Rundkäse, or Allgäuer Emmentaler
_Bavaria_

Hard; Emmentaler type. The small district of Allgäu names a mountain
of cheeses almost as fabulous as our "Rock-candy Mountain." There are
two principal kinds, vintage Allgäuer Bergkäse and soft Allgäuer
Rahmkäse, described below. This celebrated cheese section runs through
rich pasture lands right down and into the Swiss Valley of the Emme
that gives the name Emmentaler to one of the world's greatest. So it
is no wonder that Allgäuer Bergkäse can compete with the best Swiss.
Before the Russian revolution, in fact, all vintage cheeses of Allgäu
were bought up by wealthy Russian noblemen and kept in their home
caves in separate compartments for each year, as far back as the early
1900's. As with fine vintage wines, the price of the great years went
up steadily. Such cheeses were shipped to their Russian owners only
when the chief cheese-pluggers of Allgäu found they had reached their
prime.

Allgäuer Rahmkäse
_Bavaria_

Full cream, similar to Romadur and Limburger, but milder than both.
This sets a high grade for similar cheeses made in the Bavarian
mountains, in monasteries such as Andechs. It goes exquisitely with
the rich dark Bavarian beer. Some of it is as slippery as the
stronger, smellier Bierkäse, or the old-time Slipcote of England.
Like so many North Europeans, it is often flavored with caraway.
Although entirely different from its big brother, vintage Bergkäse,
Rahmkäse can stand proudly at its side as one of the finest cheeses
in Germany.

Alpe _see_ Fiore di Alpe.

Al Pepe
_Italy_

Hard and peppery, like its name. Similar to Pepato (_see_).

Alpes
_France_

Similar to Bel Paese.

Alpestra
_Austria_

A smoked cheese that tastes, smells and inhales like whatever fish it
was smoked with. The French Alps has a different Alpestre; Italy
spells hers Alpestro.

Alpestre, Alpin, or Fromage de Briançon
_France_

Hard; goat; dry; small; lightly salted. Made at Briançon and Gap.

Alpestro
_Italy_

Semisoft; goat; dry; lightly salted.

Alpin or Clérimbert
_Alpine France_

The milk is coagulated with rennet at 80° F. in two hours. The curd is
dipped into molds three to four inches in diameter and two and a half
inches in height, allowed to drain, turned several times for one day
only, then salted and ripened one to two weeks.

Altenburg, or Altenburger Ziegenkäse
_Germany_

Soft; goat; small and flat--one to two inches thick, eight inches in
diameter, weight two pounds.

Alt Kuhkäse Old Cow Cheese
_Germany_

Hard; well-aged, as its simple name suggests.

Altsohl _see_ Brinza.

Ambert, or Fourme d'Ambert
_Limagne, Auvergne, France_

A kind of Cheddar made from November to May and belonging to the
Cantal--Fourme-La Tome tribe.

American, American Cheddar
_U.S.A._

Described under their home states and distinctive names are a dozen
fine American Cheddars, such as Coon, Wisconsin, Herkimer County and
Tillamook, to name only a few. They come in as many different shapes,
with traditional names such as Daisies, Flats, Longhorns, Midgets,
Picnics, Prints and Twins. The ones simply called Cheddars weigh about
sixty pounds. All are made and pressed and ripened in about the same
way, although they differ greatly in flavor and quality. They are
ripened anywhere from two months to two years and become sharper,
richer and more flavorsome, as well as more expensive, with the
passing of time. _See_ Cheddar states and Cheddar types in Chapter 4.

Americano Romano
_U.S.A._

Hard; brittle; sharp.

Amou
_Béarn, France_

Winter cheese, October to May.

Anatolian
_Turkey_

Hard; sharp.

Anchovy Links
_U.S.A._

American processed cheese that can be mixed up with anchovies or any
fish from whitebait to whale, made like a sausage and sold in handy
links.

Ancien Impérial
_Normandy, France_

Soft; fresh cream; white, mellow and creamy like Neufchâtel and made
in the same way. Tiny bricks packaged in tin foil, two inches square,
one-half inch thick, weighing three ounces. Eaten both fresh and when
ripe. It is also called Carré and has separate names for the new and
the old: (a) Petit Carré when newly made; (b) Carré Affiné, when it
has reached a ripe old age, which doesn't take long--about the same
time as Neufchâtel.

Ancona _see_ Pecorino.

Andean
_Venezuela_

A cow's-milker made in the Andes near Mérida. It is formed into rough
cubes and wrapped in the pungent, aromatic leaves of _Frailejón
Lanudo_ (_Espeletia Schultzii_) which imparts to it a characteristic
flavor. (Description given in _Buen Provecho!_ by Dorothy Kamen-Kaye.)

Andechs
_Bavaria_

A lusty Allgäuer type. Monk-made on the monastery hill at Andechs on
Ammersee. A superb snack with equally monkish dark beer, black bread
and blacker radishes, served by the brothers in dark brown robes.

Antwerp
_Belgium_

Semihard; nut-flavored; named after its place of origin.

Appenzeller
_Switzerland, Bavaria and Baden_

Semisoft Emmentaler type made in a small twenty-pound wheel--a
pony-cart wheel in comparison to the big Swiss. There are two
qualities: (a) Common, made of skim milk and cured in brine for a
year; (b) Festive, full milk, steeped in brine with wine, plus white
wine lees and pepper. The only cheese we know of that is ripened with
lees of wine.

Appetitost
_Denmark_

Semisoft; sour milk; nutlike flavor. It's an appetizer that lives up
to its name, eaten fresh on the spot, from the loose bottom pans in
which it is made.

Appetost
_Denmark_

Sour buttermilk, similar to Primula, with caraway seeds added for
snap. Imitated in U.S.A.

Apple
_U.S.A._

A small New York State Cheddar put up in the form of a red-cheeked
apple for New York City trade. Inspired by the pear-shaped Provolone
and Baby Gouda, no doubt.

Arber
_Bohemia_

Semihard; sour milk; yellow; mellow and creamy. Made in mountains
between Bohemia and Silesia.

Argentine
_Argentina_

Argentina is specially noted for fine reproductions of classical
Italian hard-grating cheeses such as Parmesan and Romano, rich and
fruity because of the lush pampas-grass feeding.

Armavir
_Western Caucasus_

Soft; whole sour sheep milk; a hand cheese made by stirring cold, sour
buttermilk or whey into heated milk, pressing in forms and ripening in
a warm place. Similar to Hand cheese.

Arnauten _see_ Travnik.

Arovature
_Italy_

Water-buffalo milk.

Arras, Coeurs d' _see_ Coeurs.

Arrigny
_Champagne, France_

Made only in winter, November to May. Since gourmet products of the
same province often have a special affinity, Arrigny and champagne are
specially well suited to one another.

Artichoke, Cardoon or Thistle for Rennet _see_ Caillebotte.

Artificial Dessert Cheese

In the lavish days of olde England Artificial Dessert Cheese was made
by mixing one quart of cream with two of milk and spiking it with
powdered cinnamon, nutmeg and mace. Four beaten eggs were then stirred
in with one-half cup of white vinegar and the mixture boiled to a
curd. It was then poured into a cheesecloth and hung up to drain six
to eight hours. When taken out of the cloth it was further flavored
with rose water, sweetened with castor sugar, left to ripen for an
hour or two and finally served up with more cream.

Asadero, or Oaxaca
_Jalisco and Oaxaca, Mexico_

White; whole-milk. Curd is heated, and hot curd is cut and braided or
kneaded into loaves from eight ounces to eleven pounds in weight
Asadero means "suitable for roasting."

Asco
_Corsica, France_

Made only in the winter season, October to May.

Asiago I, II and III
_Vicenza, Italy_

Sometimes classed as medium and mild, depending mostly on age. Loaves
weigh about eighteen pounds each and look like American Cheddar but
have a taste all their own.

I. Mild, nutty and sharp, used for table slicing and eating.

II. Medium, semihard and tangy, also used for slicing until nine
months old.

III. Hard, old, dry, sharp, brittle. When over nine months old, it's
fine for grating.


Asin, or Water cheese
_Northern Italy_

Sour-milk; washed-curd; whitish; soft; buttery. Made mostly in spring
and eaten in summer and autumn. Dessert cheese, frequently eaten with
honey and fruit.

Au Cumin
_see_ Münster.

Au Fenouil
_see_ Tome de Savoie.

Au Foin and de Foin

A style of ripening "on the hay." _See_ Pithiviers au Foin and Fromage
de Foin.

Augelot
_Valée d'Auge, Normandy, France_

Soft; tangy; piquant Pont l'Evêque type.

d'Auray _see_ Sainte-Anne.

Aurigny, Fromage d' _see_ Alderney.

Aurillac _see_ Bleu d'Auvergne.

Aurore and Triple Aurore
_Normandy, France_

Made and eaten all year.

Australian and New Zealand
_Australia and New Zealand_

Enough cheese is produced for local consumption, chiefly Cheddar; some
Gruyère, but unfortunately mostly processed.

Autun
_Nivernais, France_

Produced and eaten all year. Fromage de Vache is another name for it
and this is of special interest in a province where the chief
competitors are made of goat's milk.

Auvergne, Bleu d' _see_ Bleu.

Au Vin Blanc, Confits _see_ Epoisses.

Avesnes, Boulette d' _see_ Boulette.

Aydes, les
_Orléanais, France_

Not eaten during July, August or September. Season, October to June.

Azeitão, Queijo do
_Portugal_

Soft, sheep, sapid and extremely oily as the superlative _ão_ implies.
There are no finer, fatter cheeses in the world than those made of
rich sheep milk in the mountains of Portugal and named for them.

Azeitoso
_Portugal_

Soft; mellow, zestful and as oily as it is named.

Azuldoch Mountain
_Turkey_

Mild and mellow mountain product.


B

Backsteiner
_Bavaria_

Resembles Limburger, but smaller, and translates Brick, from the
shape. It is aromatic and piquant and not very much like the U.S.
Brick.

Bagnes, or Fromage à la Raclette
_Switzerland_

Not only hard but very hard, named from _racler_, French for
"scrape." A thick, one-half-inch slice is cut across the whole cheese
and toasted until runny. It is then scraped off the pan it's toasted
in with a flexible knife, spread on bread and eaten like an open-faced
Welsh Rabbit sandwich.

Bagozzo, Grana Bagozzo, Bresciano
_Italy_

Hard; yellow; sharp. Surface often colored red. Parmesan type.

Bakers' cheese

Skim milk, similar to cottage cheese, but softer and finer grained.
Used in making bakery products such as cheese cake, pie, and pastries,
but may also be eaten like creamed cottage cheese.

Ball
_U.S.A._

Made from thick sour milk in Pennsylvania in the style of the original
Pennsylvania Dutch settlers.

Ballakäse or Womelsdorf

Similar to Ball.

Balls, Dutch Red

English name for Edam.

Banbury
_England_

Soft, rich cylinder about one inch thick made in the town of Banbury,
famous for its spicy, citrus-peel buns and its equestrienne. Banbury
cheese with Banbury buns made a sensational snack in the early
nineteenth century, but both are getting scarce today.

Banick
_Armenia_

White and sweet.

Banjaluka
_Bosnia_

Port-Salut type from its Trappist monastery.

Banon, or les Petits Banons
_Provence, France,_

Small, dried, sheep-milker, made in the foothills of the Alps and
exported through Marseilles in season, May to November. This sprightly
summer cheese is generously sprinkled with the local brandy and
festively wrapped in fresh green leaves.

Bar cheese
_U.S.A._

Any saloon Cheddar, formerly served on every free-lunch counter in the
U.S. Before Prohibition, free-lunch cheese was the backbone of
America's cheese industry.

Barbacena
_Minas Geraes, Brazil_

Hard, white, sometimes chalky. Named from its home city in the leading
cheese state of Brazil.

Barberey, or Fromage de Troyes
_Champagne, France_

Soft, creamy and smooth, resembling Camembert, five to six inches in
diameter and 1-1/4 inches thick. Named from its home town, Barberey,
near Troyes, whose name it also bears. Fresh, warm milk is coagulated
by rennet in four hours. Uncut curd then goes into a wooden mold with
a perforated bottom, to drain three hours, before being finished off
in an earthenware mold. The cheeses are salted, dried and ripened
three weeks in a cave. The season is from November to May and when
made in summer they are often sold fresh.

Barboux
_France_

Soft.

Baronet
_U.S.A._

A natural product, mild and mellow.

Barron
_France_

Soft.

Bassillac _see_ Bleu.

Bath
_England_

Gently made, lightly salted, drained on a straw mat in the historic
resort town of Bath. Ripened in two weeks and eaten only when covered
with a refined fuzzy mold that's also eminently edible. It is the most
delicate of English-speaking cheeses.

Battelmatt _Switzerland, St. Gothard Alps, northern Italy, and
western Austria_

An Emmentaler made small where milk is not plentiful. The "wheel" is
only sixteen inches in diameter and four inches high, weighing forty
to eighty pounds. The cooking of the curd is done at a little lower
temperature than Emmentaler, it ripens more rapidly--in four months
--and is somewhat softer, but has the same holes and creamy though
sharp, full nutty flavor.

Bauden (_see also_ Koppen)
_Germany, Austria, Bohemia and Silesia_

Semisoft, sour milk, hand type, made in herders' mountain huts in
about the same way as Harzkäse, though it is bigger. In two forms, one
cup shape (called Koppen), the other a cylinder. Strong and aromatic,
whether made with or without caraway.

Bavarian Beer cheese _see_ Bayrischer Bierkäse.

Bavarian Cream
_German_

Very soft; smooth and creamy. Made in the Bavarian mountains.
Especially good with sweet wines and sweet sauces.

Bavarois à la Vanille _see_ Fromage Bavarois.

Bayonne _see_ Fromage de Bayonne.

Bayrischer Bierkäse
_Bavaria_

Bavarian beer cheese from the Tyrol is made not only to eat with beer,
but to dunk in it.

Beads of cheese
_Tibet_

Beads of hard cheese, two inches in diameter, are strung like a
necklace of cowrie shells or a rosary, fifty to a hundred on a string.
_Also see_ Money Made of Cheese.

Beagues _see_ Tome de Savoie.

Bean Cake, Tao-foo, or Tofu
_China, Japan, the Orient_

Soy bean cheese imported from Shanghai and other oriental ports, and
also imitated in every Chinatown around the world. Made from the milk
of beans and curdled with its own vegetable rennet.

Beaujolais _see_ Chevretons.

Beaumont, or Tome de Beaumont
_Savoy, France_

A more or less successful imitation of Trappist Tamie, a trade-secret
triumph of Savoy. At its best from October to June.

Beaupré de Roybon
_Dauphiné, France_

A winter specialty made from November to April.

Beckenried
_Switzerland_

A good mountain cheese from goat milk.

Beer cheese
_U.S.A._

While our beer cheese came from Germany and the word is merely a
translation of Bierkäse, we use it chiefly for a type of strong
Limburger made mostly in Milwaukee. This fine, aromatic cheese is
considered by many as the very best to eat while drinking beer. But in
Germany Bierkäse is more apt to be dissolved in a glass or stein of
beer, much as we mix malted powder in milk, and drunk with it, rather
than eaten.

Beer-Regis
_Dorsetshire, England_

This sounds like another beer cheese, but it's only a mild Cheddar
named after its hometown in Dorsetshire.

Beist-Cheese
_Scotland_

A curiosity of the old days. "The first milk after a calving, boiled
or baked to a thick consistency, the result somewhat resembling
new-made cheese, though this is clearly not a true cheese." (MacNeill)

Belarno
_Italy_

Hard; goat; creamy dessert cheese.

Belgian Cooked
_Belgium_

The milk, which has been allowed to curdle spontaneously, is skimmed
and allowed to drain. When dry it is thoroughly kneaded by hand and is
allowed to undergo fermentation, which takes ordinarily from ten to
fourteen days in winter and six to eight days in summer. When the
fermentation is complete, cream and salt are added and the mixture is
heated slowly and stirred until homogeneous, when it is put into molds
and allowed to ripen for eight days longer. A cheese ordinarily weighs
about three-and-a-half pounds. It is not essentially different from
other forms of cooked cheese.

Beli Sir _see_ Domaci.

Bellelay, Tête de Moine, or Monk's Head
_Switzerland_

Soft, buttery, semisharp spread. Sweet milk is coagulated with rennet
in twenty to thirty minutes, the curd cut fairly fine and cooked not
so firm as Emmentaler, but firmer than Limburger. After being pressed,
the cheeses are wrapped in bark for a couple of weeks until they can
stand alone. Since no eyes are desired in the cheeses, they are
ripened in a moist cellar at a lowish temperature. They take a year to
ripen and will keep three or four years. The diameter is seven inches,
the weight nine to fifteen pounds. The monk's head after cutting is
kept wrapped in a napkin soaked in white wine and the soft, creamy
spread is scraped out to "butter" bread and snacks that go with more
white wine. Such combinations of old wine and old cheese suggest
monkish influence, which began here in the fifteenth century with the
jolly friars of the Canton of Bern. There it is still made exclusively
and not exported, for there's never quite enough to go around.

Bel Paese
_Italy_

_See under_ Foreign Greats, Chapter 3. _Also see_ Mel Fino, a blend,
and Bel Paese types--French Boudanne and German Saint Stefano. The
American imitation is not nearly so good as the Italian original.

Bel Paesino
_U.S.A._

A play on the Bel Paese name and fame. Weight one pound and diminutive
in every other way.

Bergkäse _see_ Allgäuer.

Bergquara
_Sweden_

Semihard, fat, resembles Dutch Gouda. Tangy, pleasant taste. Gets
sharper with age, as they all do. Molded in cylinders of fifteen to
forty pounds. Popular in Sweden since the eighteenth century.

Berkeley
_England_

Named after its home town in Gloucester, England.

Berliner Kuhkäse
_Berlin, Germany_

Cow cheese, pet-named turkey cock cheese by Berlin students. Typical
German hand cheese, soft; aromatic with caraway seeds, and that's
about the only difference between it and Alt Kuhkäse, without caraway.

Bernarde, Formagelle Bernarde
_Italy_

Cow's whole milk, to which about 10% of goat's milk is added for
flavor. Cured for two months.

Berques
_France_

Made of skim milk.

Berry Rennet _see_ Withania.

Bessay, le
_Bourbonnais, France_

Soft, mild, and creamy.

Bexhill
_England_

Cream cheeses, small, flat, round. Excellent munching.

Bierkäse
_Germany_

There are several of these unique beer cheeses that are actually
dissolved in a stein of beer and drunk down with it in the Bierstubes,
notably Bayrischer, Dresdener, and Olmützer. Semisoft; aromatic;
sharp. Well imitated in _echt Deutsche_ American spots such as
Milwaukee and Hoboken.

Bifrost
_Norway_

Goat; white; mildly salt. Imitated in a process spread in 4-1/4-ounce
package.

Binn
_Wallis, Switzerland_

Exceptionally fine Swiss from the great cheese canton of Wallis.

Bitto
_Northern Italy_

Hard Emmentaler type made in the Valtellina. It is really two cheeses
in one. When eaten fresh, it is smooth, sapid, big-eyed Swiss. When
eaten after two years of ripening, it is very hard and sharp and has
small eyes.

Blanc à la crème _see_ Fromage Blanc.

Blanc _see_ Fromage Blanc I and II.

Bleu
_France_

Brittle; blue-veined; smooth; biting.

Bleu d'Auvergne or Fromage Bleu
_Auvergne, France_

Hard; sheep or mixed sheep, goat or cow; from Pontgibaud and
Laqueuille ripening caves. Similar to better-known Cantal of the same
province. Akin to Roquefort and Stilton, and to Bleu de Laqueuille.

Bleu de Bassillac
_Limousin, France_

Blue mold of Roquefort type that's prime from November to May.

Bleu de Laqueuille
_France_

Similar to Bleu d'Auvergne, but with a different savor. Named for its
originator, Antoine Roussel-Laqueuille, who first made it a century
ago, in 1854.

Bleu de Limousin, Fromage
_Lower Limousin_

Practically the same as Bleu de Bassillac, from Lower Limousin.

Bleu de Salers
_France_

A variety of Bleu d'Auvergne from the same province distinguished for
its blues that are green. With the majority, this is at its best only
in the winter months, from November to May.

Bleu, Fromage _see_ Bleu d'Auvergne.

Bleu-Olivet _see_ Olivet.

Blind

The name for cheeses lacking the usual holes of the type they belong
to, such as blind Swiss.

Block Edam
_U.S.A._

U.S. imitation of the classical Dutch cheese named after the town of
Edam.

Block, Smoked
_Austria_

The name is self-explanatory and suggests a well-colored meerschaum.

Bloder, or Schlicker Milch
_Switzerland_

Sour-milker.

Blue Cheddar _see_ Cheshire-Stilton.

Blue, Danish _see_ Danish Blue.

Blue Dorset _see_ Dorset.

Blue, Jura _see_ Jura Bleu and Septmoncel.

Blue, and Blue with Port Links
_U.S.A._

One of the modern American process sausages.

Blue, Minnesota _see_ Minnesota.

Blue Moon
_U.S.A._

A process product.

Blue Vinny, Blue Vinid, Blue-veined Dorset, or Double Dorset
_Dorsetshire, England_

A unique Blue that actually isn't green-veined. Farmers make it for
private consumption, because it dries up too easily to market. An
epicurean esoteric match for Truckles No. 1 of Wiltshire. It comes in
a flat form, chalk-white, crumbly and sharply flavored, with a "royal
Blue" vein running right through horizontally. The Vinny mold, from
which it was named, is different from all other cheese molds and has a
different action.

Bocconi Geganti
_Italy_

Sharp and smoky specialty.

Bocconi Provoloni _see_ Provolone.

Boîte _see_ Fromage de Boîte.

Bombay
_India_

Hard; goat; dry; sharp. Good to crunch with a Bombay Duck in place of
a cracker.

Bondes _see_ Bondon de Neufchâtel.

Bondon de Neufchâtel, or Bondes
_Normandy, France_

Nicknamed _Bonde à tout bien_, from resemblance to the bung in a
barrel of Neuchâtel wine. Soft, small loaf rolls, fresh and mild.
Similar to Gournay, but sweeter because of 2% added sugar.

Bondon de Rouen
_France_

A fresh Neufchâtel, similar to Petit Suisse, but slightly salted, to
last up to ten days.

Bondost
_Sweden_

When caraway seed is added this is called Kommenost, spelled Kuminost
in Norway.

Bond Ost
_U.S.A._

Imitation of Scandinavian cheese, with small production in Wisconsin.

Bon Larron
_France_

Romantically named "the penitent thief."

Borden's
_U.S.A._

A full line of processed and naturals, of which Liederkranz is the
leader.

Borelli
_Italy_

A small water-buffalo cheese.

Bossons Maceres
_Provence, France_

A winter product, December, January, February and March only.

Boudanne
_France_

Whole or skimmed cow's milk, ripens in two to three months.

Boudes, Boudon
_Normandy, France_

Soft, fresh, smooth, creamy, mild child of the Neufchâtel family.

Bougon Lamothe _see_ Lamothe.

Bouillé, la
_Normandy France_

One of this most prolific province's thirty different notables. In
season October to May.

Boule de Lille
_France_

Name given to Belgian Oude Kaas by the French who enjoy it.

Boulette d'Avesnes, or Boulette de Cambrai
_Flanders, France_

Made from November to May, eaten all year.

Bourgain
_France_

Type of fresh Neufchâtel made in France. Perishable and consumed
locally.

Bourgognes _see_ Petits Bourgognes.

Box
_Württemberg, Germany_

Similar to U.S. Brick. It comes in two styles; firm, and soft:

I. Also known as Schachtelkäse, Boxed Cheese; and Hohenheim, where it
is made. A rather unimportant variety. Made in a copper kettle, with
partially skim milk, colored with saffron and spiked with caraway, a
handful to every two hundred pounds. Salted and ripened for three
months and shipped in wooden boxes.

II. Also known by names of localities where made: Hohenburg, Mondess
and Weihenstephan. Made of whole milk. Mild but piquant.

Bra No. I
_Piedmont, Italy_

Hard, round form, twelve inches in diameter, three inches high, weight
twelve pounds. A somewhat romantic cheese, made by nomads who wander
with their herds from pasture to pasture in the region of Bra.

Bra No. II
_Turin and Cuneo, Italy_

Soft, creamy, small, round and mild although cured in brine.

Brand or Brandkäse
_Germany_

Soft, sour-milk hand cheese, weighing one-third of a pound. The curd
is cooked at a high temperature, then salted and set to ferment for a
day. Butter is then mixed into it before pressing into small bricks.
After drying it is put in used beer kegs to ripen and is frequently
moistened with beer while curing.

Brandy _see_ Caledonian, Cream.

Branja de Brailia
_Rumania_

Hard; sheep; extra salty because always kept in brine.

Branja de Cosulet
_Rumania_

Described by Richard Wyndham in _Wine and Food_ (Winter, 1937): A
creamy sheep's cheese which is encased in pine bark. My only criticism
of this most excellent cheese is that the center must always remain a
gastronomical second best. It is no more interesting than a good
English Cheddar, while the outer crust has a scented, resinous flavor
which must be unique among cheeses.

Bratkäse
_Switzerland_

Strong; specially made to roast in slices over coal. Fine, grilled on
toast.

Breakfast, Frühstück, Lunch, Delikat, and other names
_Germany_

Soft and delicate, but with a strong tang. Small round, for spreading.
Lauterbach is a well-known breakfast cheese in Germany, while in
Switzerland Emmentaler is eaten at all three meals.

Breakstone
_U.S.A._

Like Borden and other leading American cheesemongers and
manufacturers, Breakstone offer a full line, of which their cream
cheese is an American product to be proud of.

Brésegaut
_Savoy, France_

Soft, white.

Breslau
_Germany_

A proud Prussian dessert cheese.

Bressans _see_ les Petits.

Bresse
_France_

Lightly cooked.

Bretagne _see_ Montauban.

Brevine
_Switzerland_

Emmentaler type.

Briançon _see_ Alpin.

Brick _see_ Chapter 4.

Brickbat
_Wiltshire, England_

A traditional Wiltshire product since early in the eighteenth century.
Made with fresh milk and some cream, to ripen for one year before
"it's fit to eat." The French call it Briqueton.

Bricotta
_Corsica_

Semisoft, sour sheep, sometimes mixed with sugar and rum and made into
small luscious cakes.

Brie _see_ Chapter 3; _also see_ Cendré and Coulommiers.

Brie Façon
_France_

The name of imitation Brie or Brie type made in all parts of France.
Often it is dry, chalky, and far inferior to the finest Brie
_véritable_ that is still made best in its original home, formerly
called La Brie, now Seine et Marne, or Ile-de-France.

_see_ Nivernais Decize, Le Mont d'Or, and Ile-de-France.

Brie de Meaux
_France_

This genuine Brie from the Meaux region has an excellent reputation
for high quality. It is made only from November to May.

Brie de Melun
_France_

This Brie _véritable_ is made not only in the seasonal months, from
November to May, but practically all the year around. It is not always
prime. Summer Brie, called Maigre, is notably poor and thin. Spring
Brie is merely Migras, half-fat, as against the fat autumn Gras that
ripens until May.

Brillat-Savarin
_Normandy, France_

Soft, and available all year. Although the author of _Physiologie du
Goût_ was not noted as a caseophile and wrote little on the subject
beyond _Le Fondue_ (_see_ Chapter 6), this savory Normandy produce is
named in his everlasting praise.

Brina Dubreala
_Rumania_

Semisoft, sheep, done in brine.

Brindza
_U.S.A._

Our imitation of this creamy sort of fresh, white Roquefort is as
popular in foreign colonies in America as back in its Hungarian and
Greek homelands. On New York's East Side several stores advertise
"Brindza fresh daily," with an extra "d" crowded into the original
Brinza.

Brine _see_ Italian Bra, Caucasian Ekiwani,
Brina Dubreala, Briney.

Briney, or Brined
_Syria_

Semisoft, salty, sharp. So-called from being processed in brine.
Turkish Tullum Penney is of the same salt-soaked type.

Brinza, or Brinsen
_Hungary, Rumania, Carpathian Mountains_

Goes by many local names: Altsohl, Klencz, Landoch, Liptauer, Neusohl,
Siebenburgen and Zips. Soft, sheep milk or sheep and goat; crumbly,
sharp and biting, but creamy. Made in small lots and cured in a tub
with beech shavings. Ftinoporino is its opposite number in Macedonia.

Brioler _see_ Westphalia.

Briquebec _see_ Providence

Briqueton
_England_

The French name for English Wiltshire Brickbat, one of the very few
cheeses imported into France. Known in France in the eighteenth
century, it may have influenced the making of Trappist Port-Salut at
the Bricquebec Monastery in Manche.

Brittle _see_ Greek Cashera, Italian Ricotta, Turkish Rarush Durmar,
and U.S. Hopi.

Brizecon
_Savoy, France_

Imitation Reblochon made in the same Savoy province.

Broccio, or le Brocconis
_Corsica, France_

Soft, sour sheep milk or goat, like Bricotta and a first cousin to
Italian Chiavari. Cream white, slightly salty; eaten fresh in Paris,
where it is as popular as on its home island. Sometimes salted and
half-dried, or made into little cakes with rum and sugar. Made and
eaten all year.

Broodkaas
_Holland_

Hard, flat, nutty.

Brousses de la Vézubie, les
_Nice, France_

Small; sheep; long narrow bar shape, served either with powdered sugar
or salt, pepper and chopped chives. Made in Vézubie.

Brussels or Bruxelles
_Belgium_

Soft, washed skim milk, fermented, semisharp, from Louvain and Hal
districts.

Budapest
_Hungary_

Soft, fresh, creamy and mellow, a favorite at home in Budapest and
abroad in Vienna.

Buderich
_Germany_

A specialty in Dusseldorf.

Bulle
_Switzerland_

A Swiss-Gruyère.

Bundost
_Sweden_

Semihard; mellow; tangy.

Burgundy
_France_

Named after the province, not the wine, but they go wonderfully
together.

Bushman
_Australia_

Semihard; yellow; tangy.

Butter and Cheese _see_ Chapter 8.

"Butter," Serbian _see_ Kajmar.

Buttermilk
_U.S. & Europe_

Resembles cottage cheese, but of finer grain.


C

Cabeçou, le
_Auvergne, France_

Small; goat; from Maurs.

Cabrillon
_Auvergne, France_

So much like the Cabreçon they might be called sister nannies under
the rind.

Cachet d'Entrechaux, le, or Fromage Fort du Ventoux

_Provence Mountains, France_

Semihard; sheep; mixed with brandy, dry white wine and sundry
seasonings. Well marinated and extremely strong. Season May to
November.

Caciocavallo
_Italy_

"Horse Cheese." The ubiquitous cheese of classical greats, imitated
all around the world and back to Italy again. _See_ Chapter 3.

Caciocavallo Siciliano
_Sicily, also in U.S.A._

Essentially a pressed Provolone. Usually from cow's whole milk, but
sometimes from goat's milk or a mixture of the two. Weight between
17-1/2 and 26 pounds. Used for both table cheese and grating.

Cacio Fiore, or Caciotta
_Italy_

Soft as butter; sheep; in four-pound square frames; sweetish; eaten
fresh.

Cacio Pecorino Romano _see_ Pecorino.

Cacio Romano _see_ Chiavari.

Caerphilly
_Wales and England--Devon, Dorset, Somerset & Wilshire_

Semihard; whole fresh milk; takes three weeks to ripen. Also sold
"green," young and innocent, at the age of ten to eleven days when
weighing about that many pounds. Since it has little keeping qualities
it should be eaten quickly. Welsh miners eat a lot of it, think it
specially suited to their needs, because it is easily digested and
does not produce so much heat in the body as long-keeping cheeses.

Caillebottes (Curds)
_France--Anjou, Poitou, Saintonge & Vendée_

Soft, creamy, sweetened fresh or sour milk clabbered with
chardonnette, wild artichoke seed, over slow fire. Cut in lozenges and
served cold not two hours after cooking. Smooth, mellow and aromatic.
A high type of this unusual cheese is Jonchée (_see_). Other cheeses
are made with vegetable rennet, some from similar thistle or cardoon
juice, especially in Portugal.

Caille de Poitiers _see_ Petits pots.

Caille de Habas
_Gascony, France_

Clabbered or clotted sheep milk.

Cajassou
_Périgord, France_

A notable goat cheese made in Cubjac.

Calabrian
_Italy_

The Calabrians make good sheep cheese, such as this and Caciocavallo.

Calcagno
_Sicily_

Hard; ewe's milk. Suitable for grating.

Caledonian Cream
_Scotland_

More of a dessert than a true cheese. We read in _Scotland's Inner
Man_: "A sort of fresh cream cheese, flavored with chopped orange
marmalade, sugar brandy and lemon juice. It is whisked for about half
an hour. Otherwise, if put into a freezer, it would be good
ice-pudding."

Calvados
_France_

Medium-hard; tangy. Perfect with Calvados applejack from the same
province.

Calvenzano
_Italy_

Similar to Gorgonzola, made in Bergamo.

Cambrai _see_ Boulette.

Cambridge, or York
_England_

Soft; fresh; creamy; tangy. The curd is quickly made in one hour and
dipped into molds without cutting to ripen for eating in thirty hours.

Camembert _see_ Chapter 3.

"Camembert"
_Germany, U.S. & elsewhere_

A West German imitation that comes in a cute little heart-shaped box
which nevertheless doesn't make it any more like the Camembert
_véritable_ of Normandy.

Camosun
_U.S.A._

Semisoft; open-textured, resembling Monterey. Drained curd is pressed
in hoops, cheese is salted in brine for thirty hours, then coated
with paraffin and cured for one to three months in humid room at 50°
to 60° F.

Canadian Club
_see_ Cheddar Club.

Cancoillotte, Cancaillotte, Canquoillotte, Quincoillotte, Cancoiade,
Fromagère, Tempête and "Purée" de fromage tres fort _Franche-Comté,
France_

Soft; sour milk; sharp and aromatic; with added eggs and butter and
sometimes brandy or dry white wine. Sold in attractive small molds and
pots. Other sharp seasonings besides the brandy or wine make this one
of the strongest of French strong cheeses, similar to Fromage Fort.

Canestrato
_Sicily, Italy_

Hard; mixed goat and sheep; yellow and strong. Takes one year to
mature and is very popular both in Sicily where it is made to
perfection and in Southern Colorado where it is imitated by and for
Italian settlers.

Cantal, Fromage de Cantal, Auvergne or Auvergne Bleu; also Fourme and
La Tome.
_Auvergne, France_

Semihard; smooth; mellow; a kind of Cheddar, lightly colored lemon;
yellow; strong, sharp taste but hardly any smell. Forty to a
hundred-twenty pound cylinders. The rich milk from highland pastures
is more or less skimmed and, being a very old variety, it is still
made most primitively. Cured six weeks or six months, and when very
old it's very hard and very sharp. A Cantal type is Laguiole or
Guiole.

Capitanata
_Italy_

Sheep.

Caprian
_Capri, Italy_

Made from milk of goats that still overrun the original Goat Island,
and tangy as a buck.

Caprino (Little Goat)
_Argentina_

Semihard; goat; sharp; table cheese.

Caraway Loaf
_U.S.A._

This is just one imitation of dozens of German caraway-seeded cheeses
that roam the world. In Germany there is not only Kümmel loaf cheese
but a loaf of caraway-seeded bread to go with it. Milwaukee has long
made a good Kümmelkäse or hand cheese and it would take more than the
fingers on both hands to enumerate all of the European originals, from
Dutch Komynkaas through Danish King Christian IX and Norwegian
Kuminost, Italian Freisa, Pomeranian Rinnen and Belgian Leyden, to
Pennsylvania Pot.

Cardiga, Queijo da
_Portugal_

Hard; sheep; oily; mild flavor. Named from cardo, cardoon in English,
a kind of thistle used as a vegetable rennet in making several other
cheeses, such as French Caillebottes curdled with chardonnette, wild
artichoke seed. Only classical Greek sheep cheeses like Casera can
compare with the superb ones from the Portuguese mountain districts.
They are lusciously oily, but never rancidly so.

Carlsbad
_Bohemia_

Semihard; sheep; white; slightly salted; expensive.

Carré Affiné
_France_

Soft, delicate, in small square forms; similar to Petit Carré and
Ancien Impérial (_see_).

Carré de l'Est
_France_

Similar to Camembert, and imitated in the U.S.A.

Cascaval Penir
_Turkey_

Cacciocavallo imitation consumed at home.

Caseralla
_Greece_

Semisoft; sheep; mellow; creamy.

Casere
_Greece_

Hard; sheep; brittle; gray and greasy. But wonderful! Sour-sweet
tongue tickle. This classical though greasy Grecian is imitated with
goat milk instead of sheep in Southern California.

Cashera
_Armenia and Greece_

Hard; goat or cow's milk; brittle; sharp; nutty. Similar to Casere and
high in quality.

Cashera
_Turkey_

Semihard; sheep.

Casher Penner _see_ Kasher.

Cashkavallo
_Syria_

Mellow but sharp imitation of the ubiquitous Italian Cacciocavallo.

Casigiolu, Panedda, Pera di vacca
_Sardinia_

Plastic-curd cheese, made by the Caciocavallo method.

Caskcaval or Kaschcavallo _see_ Feta.

Caspian
_Caucasus_

Semihard. Sheep or cow, milked directly into cone-shaped cloth bag to
speed the making. Tastes tangy, sharp and biting.

Cassaro
_Italy_

Locally consumed, seldom exported.

Castelmagno
_Italy_

Blue-mold, Gorgonzola type.

Castelo Branco, White Castle
_Portugal_

Semisoft; goat or goat and sheep; fermented. Similar to Serra da
Estrella (_see_).

Castillon, or Fromage de Gascony
_France_

Fresh cream cheese.

Castle, Schlosskäse
_North Austria_

Limburger type.

Catanzaro
_Italy_

Consumed locally, seldom exported.

Cat's Head _see_ Katzenkopf.

Celery
_Norway_

Flavored mildly with celery seeds, instead of the usual caraway.

Cendrée, la
_France--Orléanais,
Blois & Aube_

Hard; sheep; round and flat. Other Cendrées are Champenois or Ricey,
Brie, d'Aizy and Olivet

Cendré d'Aizy
_Burgundy, France_

Available all year. _See_ la Cendrée.

Cendré de la Brie
_Ile-de-France, France_

Fall and winter Brie cured under the ashes, season September to May.

Cendré Champenois or Cendré des Riceys
_Aube & Marne, France_

Made and eaten from September to June, and ripened under the ashes.

Cendré Olivet _see_ Olivet.

Cenis _see_ Mont Cenis.

Certoso Stracchino
_Italy, near Milan_

A variety of Stracchino named after the Carthusian friars who have
made it for donkey's years. It is milder and softer and creamier than
the Taleggio because it's made of cow instead of goat milk, but it has
less distinction for the same reason.

Ceva
_Italy_

Soft veteran of Roman times named from its town near Turin.

Chabichou
_Poitou, France_

Soft; goat; fresh; sweet and tasty. A vintage cheese of the months
from April to December, since such cheeses don't last long enough to
be vintaged like wine by the year.

Chaingy
_Orléans, France_

Season September to June.

Cham
_Switzerland_

One of those eminent Emmentalers from Cham, the home town of Mister
Pfister (_see_ Pfister).

Chamois milk

Aristotle said that the most savorous cheese came from the chamois.
This small goatlike antelope feeds on wild mountain herbs not
available to lumbering cows, less agile sheep or domesticated mountain
goats, so it gives, in small quantity but high quality, the richest,
most flavorsome of milk.

Champenois or Fromage des Riceys
_Aube & Marne, France_

Season from September to June. The same as Cendré Champenois and des
Riceys.

Champoléon de Queyras
_Hautes-Alpes, France_.

Hard; skim-milker.

Chantelle
_U.S.A._

Natural Port du Salut type described as "zesty" by some of the best
purveyors of domestic cheeses. It has a sharp taste and little odor,
perhaps to fill the demand for a "married man's Limburger."

Chantilly _see_ Hablé.

Chaource
_Champagne, France_

Soft, nice to nibble with the bottled product of this same high-living
Champagne Province. A kind of Camembert.

Chapelle
_France_

Soft.

Charmey Fine
_Switzerland_

Gruyère type.

Chaschol, or Chaschosis
_Canton of Grisons, Switzerland_

Hard; skim; small wheels, eighteen to twenty-two inches in diameter by
three to four inches high, weight twenty-two to forty pounds.

Chasteaux _see_ Petits Fromages.

Chateauroux _see_ Fromage de Chèvre.

Chaumont
_Champagne, France_

Season November to May.

Chavignol _see_ Crottin.

Chechaluk
_Armenia_

Soft; pot; flaky; creamy.

Cheddar _see_ Chapter 3.

Cheese bread
_Russia and U.S.A._

For centuries Russia has excelled in making a salubrious cheese bread
called Notruschki and the cheese that flavors it is Tworog. (_See
both_.) Only recently Schrafft's in New York put out a yellow, soft
and toothsome cheese bread that has become very popular for toasting.
It takes heat to bring out its full cheesy savor. Good when overlaid
with cheese butter of contrasting piquance, say one mixed with
Sapsago.

Cheese butter

Equal parts of creamed butter and finely grated or soft cheese and
mixtures thereof. The imported but still cheap green Sapsago is not to
be forgotten when mixing your own cheese butter.

Cheese food
_U.S.A._

"Any mixtures of various lots of cheese and other solids derived from
milk with emulsifying agents, coloring matter, seasonings, condiments,
relishes and water, heated or not, into a homogeneous mass."
(A long and kind word for a homely, tasteless, heterogeneous mess.)
From an advertisement

Cheese hoppers _see_ Hoppers.

Cheese mites _see_ Mites.

Cheshire and Cheshire imitations _see_ with Cheddar in
Chapter 3.

Cheshire-Stilton
_England_

In making this combination of Cheshire and Stilton, the blue mold
peculiar to Stilton is introduced in the usual Cheshire process by
keeping out each day a little of the curd and mixing it with that in
which the mold is growing well. The result is the Cheshire in size and
shape and general characteristics but with the blue veins of Stilton,
making it really a Blue Cheddar. Another combination is
Yorkshire-Stilton, and quite as distinguished.

Chester
_England_

Another name for Cheshire, used in France where formerly some was
imported to make the visiting Britishers feel at home.

Chevalier
_France_

Curds sweetened with sugar.

Chevèlle
_U.S.A._

A processed Wisconsin.

Chèvre _see_ Fromages.

Chèvre de Chateauroux _see_ Fromages.

Chèvre petit _see_ Petìts Fromages.

Chèvre, Tome de _see_ Tome.

Chevretin
_Savoy, France_

Goat; small and square. Named after the mammy nanny, as so many are.

Chevrets, Ponta & St. Rémy
_Bresse & Franche-Comté, France_

Dry and semi-dry; crumbly; goat; small squares; lightly salted. Season
December to April. Such small goat cheeses are named in the plural in
France.

Chevretons du Beaujolais à la crème, les
_Lyonnais, France_

Small goat-milkers served with cream. This is a fair sample of the
railroad names some French cheeses stagger under.

Chevrotins
_Savoy, France_

Soft, dried goat milk; white; small; tangy and semi-tangy. Made and
eaten from March to December.

Chhana
_Asia_

All we know is that this is made of the whole milk of cows, soured,
and it is not as unusual as the double "h" in its name.

Chiavari
_Italy_

There are two different kinds named for
the Chiavari region, and both are hard:
 I. Sour cow's milk, also known as Cacio Romano.
II. Sweet whole milker, similar to Corsican Broccio. Chiavari, the
    historic little port between Genoa and Pisa, is more noted as the
    birthplace of the barbaric "chivaree" razzing of newlyweds with
    its raucous serenade of dishpans, sour-note bugling and such.

Chives cream cheese

Of the world's many fine fresh cheeses further freshened with chives,
there's Belgian Hervé and French Claqueret (with onion added). (_See
both_.) For our taste it's best when the chives are added at home, as
it's done in Germany, in person at the table or just before.

Christalinna
_Canton Graubünden, Switzerland_

Hard; smooth; sharp; tangy.

Christian IX
_Denmark_

A distinguished spiced cheese.

Ciclo
_Italy_

Soft, small cream cheese.

Cierp de Luchon
_France_

Made from November to May in the Comté de Foix, where it has the
distinction of being the only local product worth listing with
France's three hundred notables.

Citeaux
_Burgundy, France_

Trappist Port-Salut.

Clabber cheese
_England_

Simply cottage cheese left in a cool place until it grows soft and
automatically changes its name from cottage to clabber.

Clairvaux
_France_

Formerly made in a Benedictine monastery of that name.

Claqueret, le
_Lyonnais, France_

Fresh cream whipped with chives, chopped fine with onions. _See_
Chives.

Clérimbert _see_ Alpin.

Cleves
_France_

French imitation of the German imitation of a Holland-Dutch original.

Cloves _see_ Nagelkäse.

Club, Potted Club, Snappy, Cold-pack and Comminuted cheese
_U.S.A. and Canada_

Probably McLaren's Imperial Club in pots was first to be called club,
but others credit club to the U.S. In any case McLaren's was bought by
an American company and is now all-American.

Today there are many clubs that may sound swanky but taste very
ordinary, if at all. They are made of finely ground aged, sharp
Cheddar mixed with condiments, liquors, olives, pimientos, etc., and
mostly carry come-on names to make the customers think they are
getting something from Olde England or some aristocratic private club.
All are described as "tangy."

Originally butter went into the better clubs which were sold in small
porcelain jars, but in these process days they are wrapped in smaller
tin foil and wax-paper packets and called "snappy."

Cocktail Cheeses

Recommended from stock by Phil Alpert's "Cheeses of all Nations"
stores:

Argentine aged Gruyère
Canadian d'Oka
French Bleu
Brie
Camembert
Fontainebleu
Pont l'Evêque
Port du Salut
Roblochon
Roquefort
Grecian Feta
Hungarian Brinza
Polish Warshawski Syr
Rumanian Kaskaval
Swiss Schweizerkäse
American Cheddar in brandy
Hopi Indian

Coeur à la Crème
_Burgundy, France_

This becomes Fromage à la Crème II (_see_) when served with sugar, and
it is also called a heart of cream after being molded into that
romantic shape in a wicker or willow-twig basket.

Coeurs d'Arras
_Artois, France_

These hearts of Arras are soft, smooth, mellow, caressingly rich with
the cream of Arras.

Coffee-flavored cheese

Just as the Dutch captivated coffee lovers all over the world with
their coffee-flavored candies, Haagische Hopjes, so the French with
Jonchée cheese and Italians with Ricotta satisfy the universal craving
by putting coffee in for flavor.

Coimbra
_Portugal_

Goat or cow; semihard; firm; round; salty; sharp. Not only one of
those college-educated cheeses but a postgraduate one, bearing the
honored name of Portugal's ancient academic center.

Colby
_U.S.A._

Similar to Cheddar, but of softer body and more open texture. Contains
more moisture, and doesn't keep as well as Cheddar.

College-educated

Besides Coimbra several countries have cheeses brought out by their
colleges. Even Brazil has one in Minas Geraes and Transylvania another
called Kolos-Monostor, while our agricultural colleges in every big
cheese state from California through Ames in Iowa, Madison in
Wisconsin, all across the continent to Cornell in New York, vie with
one another in turning out diploma-ed American Cheddars and such of
high degree. It is largely to the agricultural colleges that we owe
the steady improvement in both quality and number of foreign
imitations since the University of Wisconsin broke the curds early in
this century by importing Swiss professors to teach the high art of
Emmentaler.

Colwick _see_ Slipcote.

Combe-air
_France_

Small; similar to Italian Stracchino in everything but size.

Commission
_Holland_

Hard; ball-shaped like Edam and resembling it except being darker in
color and packed in a ball weighing about twice as much, around eight
pounds. It is made in the province of North Holland and in Friesland.
It is often preferred to Edam for size and nutty flavor.

Compiègne
_France_

Soft

Comté _see_ Gruyère.

Conches
_France_

Emmentaler type.

Condrieu, Rigotte de la
_Rhone Valley below Lyons, France_

Semihard; goat; small; smooth; creamy; mellow; tasty. A cheese of
cheeses for epicures, only made from May to November when pasturage is
rich.

Confits au Marc de Bourgogne _see_ Epoisses.

Confits au Vin Blanc _see_ Epoisses.

Cooked, or Pennsylvania pot
_U.S.A._

Named from cooking sour clabbered curd to the melting point. When cool
it is allowed to stand three or four days until it is colored through.
Then it is cooked again with salt, milk, and usually caraway. It is
stirred until it's as thick as molasses and strings from a spoon. It
is then put into pots or molds, whose shape it retains when turned
out.

All cooked cheese is apt to be tasteless unless some of the milk
flavor cooked out is put back in, as wheat germ is now returned to
white bread. Almost every country has a cooked cheese all its own,
with or without caraway, such as the following:

Belgium--Kochtounkäse
Germany--Kochkäse, Topfen
Luxembourg--Kochenkäse
France--Fromage Ouit & Le P'Teux
Sardinia--Pannedas, Freisa

Coon _see_ Chapter 4.

Cornhusker
_U.S.A._

A Nebraska product similar to Cheddar and Colby, but with softer body
and more moisture.

Cornimont
_Vosges, France_

A splendid French version of Alsatian Münster spiked with caraway, in
flattish cylinders with mahogany-red coating. It is similar to Géromé
and the harvest cheese of Gérardmer in the same lush Vosges Valley.

Corse, Roquefort de
_Corsica, France_

Corsican imitation of the real Roquefort, and not nearly so good, of
course.

Cossack
_Caucasus_

Cow or sheep. There are two varieties:
I. Soft, cured in brine and still soft and mild after two months in
   the salt bath.
II. Semihard and very sharp after aging in brine for a year or more.

Cotherstone
_Yorkshire, England_

Also known as Yorkshire-Stilton, and Wensleydale No. I. (_See both_.)

Cotrone, Cotronese _see_ Pecorino.

Cotta _see_ Pasta.

Cottage cheese

Made in all countries where any sort of milk is obtainable. In America
it's also called pot, Dutch, and smearcase. The English, who like
playful names for homely dishes, call cottage cheese smearcase from
the German Schmierkäse. It is also called Glumse in Deutschland, and,
together with cream, formed the basis of all of our fine Pennsylvania
Dutch cuisine.

Cottenham or Double Cottenham
_English Midlands_

Semihard; double cream; blue mold. Similar to Stilton but creamier and
richer, and made in flatter and broader forms.

Cottslowe
_Cotswold, England_

A brand of cream cheese named for its home in Cotswold, Gloucester.
Although soft, it tastes like hard Cheddar.

Coulommiers Frais, or Petit-Moule
_Ile-de-France, France_

Fresh cream similar to Petit Suisse. (_See_.)

Coulommiers, le, or Brie de Coulommiers
_France_

Also called Petit-moule, from its small form. This genuine Brie is a
pocket edition, no larger than a Camembert, standing only one inch
high and measuring five or six inches across. It is made near Paris
and is a great favorite from the autumn and winter months, when it is
made, on until May. The making starts in October, a month earlier than
most Brie, and it is off the market by July, so it's seldom tasted by
the avalanche of American summer tourists.

Cow cheese

Sounds redundant, and is used mostly in Germany, where an identifying
word is added, such as Berliner Kuhkäse and Alt Kuhkäse: old cow
cheese.

Cream cheese
_International_

England, France and America go for it heavily. English cream begins
with Devonshire, the world-famous, thick fresh cream that is sold cool
in earthenware pots and makes fresh berries--especially the small wild
strawberries of rural England--taste out of this world. It is also
drained on straw mats and formed into fresh hardened cheeses in small
molds. (_See_ Devonshire cream.) Among regional specialties are the
following, named from their place of origin or commercial brands:

Cambridge
Cottslowe
Cornwall
Farm Vale
Guilford
Homer's
"Italian"
Lincoln
New Forest
Rush (from being made on rush or straw mats--_see_ Rush)
St. Ivel (distinguished for being made with acidophilus bacteria)
Scotch Caledonian
Slipcote  (famous in the eighteenth century)
Victoria
York

Crème Chantilly _see_ Hablé.

Crème de Gien _see_ Fromage.

Crème de Gruyère
_Franche-Comté France_

Soft Gruyère cream cheese, arrives in America in perfect condition in
tin foil packets. Expensive but worth it.

Crème des Vosges
_Alsace, France_

Soft cream. Season October to April.

Crème Double _see_ Double-Crème.

Crème, Fromage à la _see_ Fromage.

Crème, Fromage Blanc à la _see_ Fromage Blanc.

Crème St Gervais _see_ Pots de Crème St Gervais.

Crèmet Nantais
_Lower Loire, France_

Soft fresh cream of Nantes.

Crèmets, les
_Anjou, France_

A fresh cream equal to English Devonshire, served more as a dessert
than a dessert cheese. The cream is whipped stiff with egg whites,
drained and eaten with more fresh cream, sprinkled with vanilla and
sugar.

Cremini
_Italy_

Soft, small cream cheese from Cremona, the violin town. And by the
way, art-loving Italians make ornamental cheeses in the form of
musical instruments, statues, still life groups and everything.

Creole
_Louisiana, U.S.A._

Soft, rich, unripened cottage cheese type, made by mixing cottage-type
curd and rich cream.

Crescenza, Carsenza, Stracchino Crescenza, Crescenza Lombardi
_Lombardy, Italy_

Uncooked; soft; creamy; mildly sweet; fast-ripening; yellowish; whole
milk. Made from September to April.

Creuse
_Creuse, France_

A two-in-one farm cheese of skimmed milk, resulting from two different
ways of ripening, after the cheese has been removed from perforated
earthen molds seven inches in diameter and five or six inches high,
where it has drained for several days:
 I. It is salted and turned frequently until very dry and hard.
II. It is ripened by placing in tightly closed mold, lined with straw.
    This softens, flavors, and turns it golden-yellow. (_See_ Hay
    or Fromage de Foin.)

Creusois, or Guéret
_Limousin, France_

Season, October to June.

Croissant Demi-sel
_France_

Soft, double cream, semisalty. All year.

Crottin de Chavignol
_Berry, France_

Semihard; goat's milk; small; lightly salted; mellow. In season April
to December. The name is not exactly complimentary.

Crowdie, or Cruddy butter
_Scotland_

Named from the combination of fresh sweet milk curds pressed together
with fresh butter. A popular breakfast food in Inverness and the Ross
Shires. When kept for months it develops a high flavor. A similar curd
and butter is made by Arabs and stored in vats, the same as in India,
the land of ghee, where there's no refrigeration.

Crying Kebbuck

F. Marion MacNeill, in _The Scots Kitchen_ says that this was the name
of a cheese that used to be part of the Kimmers feast at a lying-in.

Cuajada _see_ Venezuela.

Cubjac _see_ Cajassou.

Cuit _see_ Fromage Cuit.

Cumin, Münster au _see_ Münster.

Cup _see_ Koppen.

Curd _see_ Granular curd, Sweet curd and York curd.

Curds and butter
_Arabia_

Fresh sweet milk curd and fresh butter are pressed together as in
making Crowdie or Cruddy butter in Scotland. The Arabs put this strong
mixture away in vats to get it even stronger than East Indian ghee.

Curé, Fromage de _see_ Nantais.


D

Daisies, fresh

A popular type and packaging of mild Cheddar, originally English.
Known as an "all-around cheese," to eat raw, cook, let ripen, and use
for seasoning.

Dalmatian
_Austria_

Hard ewe's-milker.

Dambo
_Denmark_

Semihard and nutty.

Damen, or Glory of the Mountains (Gloires des Montagnes)
_Hungary_

Soft, uncured, mild ladies' cheese, as its name asserts. Popular
Alpine snack in Viennese cafés with coffee gossip in the afternoon.

Danish Blue
_Denmark_

Semihard, rich, blue-veined, piquant, delicate, excellent imitation of
Roquefort. Sometimes called "Danish Roquefort," and because it is
exported around the world it is Denmark's best-known cheese. Although
it sells for 20% to 30% less than the international triumvirate of
Blues, Roquefort, Stilton and Gorgonzola, it rivals them and
definitely leads lesser Blues.

Danish Export
_Denmark_

Skim milk and buttermilk. Round and flat, mild and mellow. A fine
cheese, as many Danish exports are.

Dansk Schweizerost
_Denmark_

Danish Swiss cheese, imitation Emmentaler, but with small holes.
Nutty, sweet dessert or "picnic cheese," as Swiss is often called.

Danzig
_Poland_

A pleasant cheese to accompany a glass of the great liqueur,
Goldwasser, Eau de Vie de Danzig, from the same celebrated city.

Darling
_U.S.A._

One of the finest Vermont Cheddars, handled for years by one of
America's finest fancy food suppliers, S.S. Pierce of Boston.

Dauphin
_Flanders, France_

Season, November to May.

d'Aurigny, Fromage _see_ Alderney.

Daventry
_England_

A Stilton type, white, small, round, flat and very rich, with "blue"
veins of a darker green.

Decize
_Nivernaise, France_

In season all year. Soft, creamy, mellow, resembles Brie.

de Foin, Fromage _see_ Hay.

de Fontine
_Spain_

Crumbly, sharp, nutty.

de Gascony, Fromage _see_ Castillon.

de Gérardmer _see_ Récollet.

Delft
_Holland_

About the same as Leyden. (_See_.)

Délicieux

The brand name of a truly delicious Brie.

Delikat
_U.S.A._

A mellow breakfast spread, on the style of the German Frühstück
original. (_See_.)

de Lile, Boule

French name for Belgian Oude Kaas.

Demi-Étuve

Half-size Étuve. (_See_.)

Demi Petit Suisse

The name for an extra small Petit Suisse to distinguish it from the
Gros.

Demi-Sel
_Normandy, France_

Soft, whole, creamy, lightly salted, resembles Gournay but slightly
saltier; also like U.S. cream cheese, but softer and creamier.

Demi-Sel, Croissant _see_ Croissant Demi-Sel.

Derby, or Derbyshire
_England_

Hard; shape like Austrian Nagelkassa and the size of Cheshire though
sometimes smaller. Dry, large, flat, round, flaky, sharp and tangy. A
factory cheese said to be identical with Double Gloucester and similar
to Warwickshire, Wiltshire and Leicester. The experts pronounce it "a
somewhat inferior Cheshire, but deficient in its quality and the
flavor of Cheddar." So it's unlikely to win in any cheese derby in
spite of its name.

Devonshire cream and cheese
_England_

Devonshire cream is world famous for its thickness and richness.
Superb with wild strawberries; almost a cream cheese by itself.
Devonshire cream is made into a luscious cheese ripened on straw,
which gives it a special flavor, such as that of French Foin or Hay
cheese.

Dolce Verde
_Italy_

This creamy blue-vein variety is named Sweet Green, because
cheesemongers are color-blind when it comes to the blue-greens and the
green-blues.

Domaci Beli Sir
_Yugoslavia_

"Sir" is not a title but the word for cheese. This is a typical
ewe's-milker cured in a fresh sheep skin.

Domestic Gruyère
_U.S.A._

An imitation of a cheese impossible to imitate.

Domestic Swiss
_U.S.A_

Same as domestic Gruyère, maybe more so, since it is made in ponderous
150-to 200-pound wheels, chiefly in Wisconsin and Ohio. The trouble is
there is no Alpine pasturage and Emmentaler Valley in our country.

Domiati
_Egypt_

Whole or partly skimmed cow's or buffalo's milk. Soft; white; no
openings; mild and salty when fresh and cleanly acid when cured. It's
called "a pickled cheese" and is very popular in the Near East.

Dorset, Double Dorset, Blue Dorset, or Blue Vinny
_England_

Blue mold type from Dorsetshire; crumbly, sharp; made in flat forms.
"Its manufacture has been traced back 150 years in the family of F.E.
Dare, who says that in all probability it was made longer ago than
that." (_See_ Blue Vinny.)

Dotter
_Nürnberg, Germany_

An entirely original cheese perfected by G. Leuchs in Nürnberg. He
enriched skim milk with yolk of eggs and made the cheese in the usual
way. When well ripened it is splendid.

Doubles

The English name cheese made of whole milk "double," such as Double
Cottenham, Double Dorset, Double Gloucester. "Singles" are cheeses
from which some of the cream has been removed.

Double-cream
_England_

Similar to Wensleydale.

Double-crème
_France_

There are several of this name, made in the summer when milk is
richest in cream. The full name is Fromage à la Double-crème, and
Pommel is one well known. They are made throughout France in season
and are much in demand.

Dresdener Bierkäse
_Germany_

A celebrated hand cheese made in Dresden. The typical soft, skim
milker, strong with caraway and drunk dissolved in beer, as well as
merely eaten.

Drinking cheeses

Not only Dresdener, but dozens of regional hand cheeses in Germanic
countries are melted in steins of beer or glasses of wine to make
distinctive cheesed drinks for strong stomachs and noses. This peps up
the drinks in somewhat the same way as ale and beer are laced with
pepper sauce in some parts.

Dry
_Germany_

From the drinking cheese just above to dry cheese is quite a leap.
"This cheese, known as Sperrkäse and Trockenkäse, is made in the small
dairies of the eastern part of the Bavarian Alps and in the Tyrol. It
is an extremely simple product, made for home consumption and only in
the winter season, when the milk cannot be profitably used for other
purposes. As soon as the milk is skimmed it is put into a large kettle
which can be swung over a fire, where it is kept warm until it is
thoroughly thickened from souring. It is then broken up and cooked
quite firm. A small quantity of salt and sometimes some caraway seed
are added, and the curd is put into forms of various sizes. It is then
placed in a drying room, where it becomes very hard, when it is ready
for eating." (From U.S. Department of Agriculture _Bulletin_ No. 608.)

Dubreala _see_ Brina.

Duel
_Austria_

Soft; skim milk; hand type; two by two by one-inch cube.

Dunlop
_Scotland_

One of the national cheeses of Scotland, but now far behind Cheddar,
which it resembles, although it is closer in texture and moister.
Semihard; white; sharp; buttery; tangy and rich in flavor. It is one
of the "toasting cheeses" resembling Lancashire, too, in form and
weight. Made in Ayr, Lanark and Renfrew and sold in the markets of
Kilmarnock, Kirkcudbright and Wigtown.

Durak
_Turkey_

Mixed with butter; mellow and smoky. Costs three dollars a pound.

Duralag, or Bgug-Panir
_Armenia_

Sheep; semisoft to brittle hard; square; sharp but mellow and tangy
with herbs. Sometimes salty from lying in a brine bath from two days
to two months.

Durmar, Rarush _see_ Rarush.

Dutch
_Holland_

Cream cheese of skim milk, very perishable spread.

Dutch cheese

American vernacular for cottage or pot cheese.

Dutch Cream Cheese
_England_

Made in England although called Dutch. Contains eggs, and is therefore
richer than Dutch cream cheese in Holland itself. In America we call
the original Holland-kind Dutch, cottage, pot, and farmer.

Dutch Mill
_U.S.A._

A specialty of Oakland, California.

Dutch Red Balls

English name for Edam.


E

Echourgnac, Trappe d'
_Périgord, France_

Trappist monastery Port-Salut made in Limousin.

Edam _see_ Chapter 3.

Egg
_Finland_

Semihard. One of the few cheeses made by adding eggs to the curds.
Others are Dutch Cream Cheese of England; German Dotter; French
Fromage Cuit (cooked cheese), and Westphalian. Authorities agree that
these should be labeled "egg cheese" so the buyers won't be fooled by
their richness. The Finns age their eggs even as the Chinese ripen
their hundred-year-old eggs, by burying them in grain, as all
Scandinavians do, and the Scotch as well, in the oat bin. But none of
them is left a century to ripen, as eggs are said to be in China.

Elbinger, or Elbing
_West Prussia_

Hard; crumbly; sharp. Made of whole milk except in winter when it is
skimmed. Also known as Werderkäse and Niederungskäse.

Ekiwani
_Caucasus_

Hard; sheep; white; sharp; salty with some of the brine it's bathed
in.

Elisavetpolen, or Eriwani
_Caucasus_

Hard; sheep; sweetish-sharp and slightly salty when fresh from the
brine bath. Also called Kasach (Cossack), Tali, Kurini and Karab in
different locales.

Elmo Table
_Italy_

Soft, mellow, tasty.

Emiliano
_Italy_

Hard; flavor varies from mild to sharp. Parmesan type.

Emmentaler
_Switzerland_

There are so many, many types of this celebrated Swiss all around the
world that we're not surprised to find Lapland reindeer milk cheese
listed as similar to Emmentaler of the hardest variety. (_See_ Chapter
3, _also_ Vacherin Fondu.)

"En enveloppe"

French phrase of packaged cheese, "in the envelope." Similar to
English packet and our process. Raw natural cheese the French refer to
frankly as _nu_, "in the nude."

Engadine
_Graubünden, Switzerland_

Semihard; mild; tangy-sweet.

English Dairy
_England and U.S.A._

Extra-hard, crumbly and sharp. Resembles Cheddar and has long been
imitated in the States, chiefly as a cooking cheese.

Entrechaux, le Cachat d' _see_ Cachat.

Epoisses, Fromage d'
_Côte d'Or, Upper Burgundy, France_

Soft, small cylinder with flattened end, about five inches across. The
season is from November to July. Equally proud of their wine and
cheese, the Burgundians marry white wine or _marc_ to d'Epoisses in
making _confits_ with that name.

Erbo
_Italy_

Similar to Gorgonzola. The Galvani cheesemakers of Italy who put out
both Bel Paese and Taleggio also export Erbo to our shores.

Erce
_Languedoc, France_

Soft, smooth and sharp. A winter cheese in season only from November
to May.

Eriwani _see_ Elisavetpolen.

Ervy
_Champagne, France_

Soft; yellow rind; smooth; tangy; piquant; seven by two-and-a-half
inches, weight four pounds. Resembles Camembert. A washed cheese, also
known as Fromage de Troyes. In season November to May.

Essex
_U.S.A._

Imitation of an extinct or at least dormant English type.

Estrella _see_ Serra da Estrella.

Étuve and Demi-Étuve
_Holland_

Semihard; smooth; mellow. In full size and demi (half) size. In season
all year.

Evarglice
_Yugoslavia_

Sharp, nutty flavor.

Excelsior
_Normandy, France_

Season all year.


F

Factory Cheddar
_U.S.A._

Very Old Factory Cheddar is the trade name for well-aged sharp
Cheddar. New Factory is just that--mild, young and tractable--too
tractable, in fact.

Farm
_France_

Known as Ferme; Maigre (thin); Fromage à la Pie (nothing to do with
apple pie); and Mou (weak). About the same as our cottage cheese.

Farmer
_U.S.A._

This is curd only and is nowadays mixed with pepper, lachs, nuts,
fruits, almost anything. A very good base for your own fancy spread,
or season a slab to fancy and bake it like a hoe cake, but in the
oven.

Farmhouse _see_ Herrgårdsost.

Farm Vale
_England_

Cream cheese of Somerset wrapped in tin foil and boxed in wedges,
eight to a box.

Fat cheese _see_ Frontage Gras and Maile Pener.

Fenouil _see_ Tome de Savoie.

Ferme _see_ Farm.

Feta _see_ Chapter 3.

Feuille de Dreux
_Béarn, France_

November to May.

"Filled cheese"
_England_

Before our processed and food cheese era some scoundrels in the cheese
business over there added animal fats and margarine to skimmed milk to
make it pass as whole milk in making cheese. Such adulteration killed
the flavor and quality, and no doubt some of the customers. Luckily in
America we put down this vicious counterfeiting with pure food laws.
But such foreign fats are still stuffed into the skimmed milk of many
foreign cheeses. To take the place of the natural butterfat the phony
fats are whipped in violently and extra rennet is added to speed up
coagulation.

Fin de Siècle
_Normandy, France_

Although this is an "all year" cheese its name dates it back to the
years at the close of the nineteenth century.

Fiore di Alpe
_Italy_

Hard; sharp; tangy. Romantically named "Flowers of the Alps."

Fiore Sardo
_Italy_

Ewe's milk. Hard. Table cheese when immature; a condiment when fully
cured.

Flandre, Tuile de
_France_

A kind of Marolles.

Fleur de Deauville
_France_

A type of Brie, in season December to May.

Fleur des Alpes _see_ Bel Paese and Millefiori.

Floedeost
_Norway_

Like Gjedeost, but not so rich because it's made of cow's milk.

Fløtost
_Norway_

Although the name translates Cream Cheese it is made of boiled whey.
Similar to Mysost, but fatter.

Flower
_England_

Soft and fragrant with petals of roses, violets, marigolds and such,
delicately mixed in. Since the English are so fond of oriental teas
scented with jasmine and other flowers, perhaps they imported the idea
of mixing petals with their cheese, since there is no oriental cheese
for them to import except bean curd.

Fodder cheese

A term for cheese made from fodder in seasons when there is no grass.
Good fresh grass is the essence of all fine cheese, so silo or
barn-fed cows can't give the kind of milk it takes.

Foggiano
_Apulia, Italy_

A member of the big Pecorino family because it's made of sheep's milk.

Foin, Fromage de _see_ Hay.

Fondu, Vacherin _see_ Vacherin Fondu.

Fontainebleau
_France_

Named after its own royal commune. Soft; fresh cream; smooth; mellow;
summer variety.

Fontina
_Val d'Acosta, Italy_

Soft; goat; creamy; with a nutty flavor and delightful aroma.

Fontine, de
_Franche-Comté, France_

A favorite all-year product.

Fontinelli
_Italy_

Semidry; flaky; nutty; sharp.

Fontini
_Parma, Italy_

Hard; goat; similar to Swiss, but harder and sharper. From the same
region as Parmesan.

Food cheese
_U.S.A._

An unattractive type of processed mixes, presumably with some cheese
content to flavor it.

Forez, also called d'Ambert
_France_

The process of making this is said to be very crude, and the ripening
unusual. The cheeses are cylindrical, ten inches in diameter and six
inches high. They are ripened by placing them on the floor of the
cellar, covering with dirt, and allowing water to trickle over them.
Many are spoiled by the unusual growths of mold and bacteria. The
flavor of the best of these is said to resemble Roquefort. (From
_Bulletin_ No. 608 of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to which we
are indebted for descriptions of hundreds of varieties in this
alphabet.)

Formagelle
_Northwest Italy_

Soft, ripened specialty put up in half-pound packages.

Formaggi di Pasta Filata
_Italy_

A group of Italian cheeses made by curdling milk with rennet, warming
and fermenting the curd, heating it until it is plastic, drawing it
into ropes and then kneading and shaping while hot. Provolone,
Caciocavallo and Mozzarella are in this group.

Formaggini, and Formaggini di Lecco
_Italy_

Several small cheeses answer to this name, of which Lecco is typical.
A Lombardy dessert cheese measuring 1-1/4 by two inches, weighing two
ounces. It is eaten from the time it is fresh and sweet until it
ripens to piquance. Sometimes made of cow and goat milk mixed, with
the addition of oil and vinegar, as well as salt, pepper, sugar and
cinnamon.

Formaggio d'Oro
_Northwest Italy_

Hard, sharp, mountain-made.

Formaggio Duro (Dry)
and Formaggio Tenero _see_ Nostrale.

Fort _see_ Fromage Fort.

Fourme, Cantal, and la Tome
_Auvergne, France_

This is a big family in the rich cheese province of Auvergne, where
many mountain varieties are baptized after their districts, such as
Aubrac, Aurilla, Grand Murol, Rôche and Salers. (_See_ Fourme d'Ambert
and Cantal.)

Fourme de Montebrison
_Auvergne, France_

This belongs to the Fourme clan and is in season from November to May.

Fourme de Salers _see_ Cantal, which it resembles so closely
it is sometimes sold under that name.

Fresa, or Pannedas
_Sardinia, Italy_

A soft, mild and sweet cooked cheese.

Fribourg
_Italy and Switzerland_

Hard; cooked-curd, Swiss type very similar to Spalen. (_See_)

Frissche Kaas, Fresh cheese
_Holland_

Dutch generic name for any soft, fresh spring cheese, although some is
made in winter, beginning in November.

Friesian _see_ West Friesian.

Fromage à la Creme
_France_

  I. Sour milk drained and mixed with cream. Eaten with sugar. That of
     Gien is a noted produce, and so is d'Isigny.
 II. Franche-Comté--fresh sheep milk melted with fresh thick cream,
     whipped egg whites and sugar.
III. Morvan--homemade cottage cheese. When milk has soured solid it is
     hung in cheesecloth in a cool place to drain, then mixed with a
     little fresh milk and served with cream.
 IV. When Morvan or other type is put into a heart-shaped wicker basket
     for a mold, and marketed in that, it becomes Coeur à la Crème,
     heart of cream, to be eaten with sugar.

Fromage à la Pie _see_ Fromage Blanc just below, and Farm

Fromage Bavarois à la Vanille
_France_

Dessert cheese sweetened and flavored with vanilla and named after
Bavaria where it probably originated.

Fromage Blanc
_France_

Soft cream or cottage cheese, called à la Pie, too, suggesting pie à
la mode; also Farm from the place it's made. Usually eaten with salt
and pepper, in summer only. It is the ascetic version of Fromage à la
Crème, usually eaten with salt and pepper and without cream or sugar,
except in the Province of Bresse where it is served with cream and
called Fromage Blanc à la Crème.

Every milky province has its own Blanc. In Champagne it's made of
fresh ewe milk. In Upper Brittany it is named after Nantes and also
called Fromage de Curé. Other districts devoted to it are
Alsace-Lorraine, Auvergne, Languedoc, and Ile-de-France.

Fromage Bleu _see_ Bleu d'Auvergne.

Fromage Cuit (cooked cheese)
_Thionville, Lorraine, France_

Although a specialty of Lorraine, this cooked cheese is produced in
many places. First it is made with fresh whole cow milk, then pressed
and potted. After maturing a while it is de-potted, mixed with milk
and egg yolk, re-cooked and re-potted.

Fromage d'Aurigny _see_ Alderney.

Fromage de Bayonne
_Bayonne, France_

Made with ewe's milk.

Fromage de Bôite
_Doubs, France_

Soft, mountain-made, in the fall only. Resembles Pont l'Evêque.

Fromage de Bourgogne

_see_ Burgundy.

Fromage de Chèvre de Chateauroux
_Berry, France_

A seasonal goat cheese.

Fromage de Curé _see_ Nantais.

Fromage de Fontenay-le Comté
_Poitou, France_

Half goat and half cow milk.

Fromage de Gascony _see_ Castillon.

Fromage de Pau _see_ La Foncée.

Fromage de St. Rémy _see_ Chevrets.

Fromage de Serac
_Savoy, France_

Half and half, cow and goat, from Serac des Allues.

Fromage de Troyes
_France_

Two cheeses have this name. (_See_ Barberry and Ervy.)

Fromage de Vache

Another name for Autun.

Fromage de Monsieur Fromage
_Normandy, France_

This Cheese of Mr. Cheese is as exceptional as its name. Its season
runs from November to June. It comes wrapped in a green leaf, maybe
from a grape vine, suggesting what to drink with it. It is semidry,
mildly snappy with a piquant pungence all its own. The playful name
suggests the celebrated dish, Poulette de Madame Poulet, Chick of Mrs.
Chicken.

Fromage Fort
_France_

Several cooked cheeses are named Fort (strong) chiefly in the
department of Aisne. Well-drained curd is melted, poured into a cloth
and pressed, then buried in dry ashes to remove any whey left. After
being fermented eight to ten days it is grated, mixed with butter,
salt, pepper, wine, juniper berries, butter and other things, before
fermenting some more.

Similar extra-strong cheeses are the one in Lorraine called Fondue and
Fromagère of eastern France, classed as the strongest cheeses in all
France.

_Fort No. I_: That of Flanders, potted with juniper berries, as the
gin of this section is flavored, plus pepper, salt and white wine.

_Fort No. II_: That from Franche-Comté Small dry goat cheeses pounded
and potted with thyme, tarragon, leeks, pepper and brandy. (_See_
Hazebrook.)

_Fort No. III_: From Provence, also called Cachat d'Entrechaux. In
production from May to November. Semihard, sheep milk, mixed with
brandy, white wine, strong herbs and seasonings and well marinated.

Fromage Gras (fat cheese)
_Savoy, France_

Soft, round, fat ball called _tête de mort_, "death's head." Winter
Brie is also called Gras but there is no relation. This macabre name
incited Victor Meusy to these lines:

    _Les gens à l'humeur morose
    Prennent la Tête-de-Mort._

    People of a morose disposition
    Take the Death's Head.

Fromage Mou

Any soft cheese.

Fromage Piquant _see_ Remoudon.

Fromagère _see_ Canquillote.

Fromages de Chèvre
_Orléanais, France_

Small, dried goat-milkers.

Frühstück

Also known as breakfast and lunch cheese. Small rounds two-and-a-half
to three inches in diameter. Limburger type. Cheeses on which many
Germans and Americans break their fast.

Ftinoporino
_Macedonia, Greece_

Sheep's-milker similar to Brinza.


G

Gaiskäsli
_Germany and Switzerland_

A general name for goat's milk cheese. Usually a small cylinder three
inches in diameter and an inch-and-a-half thick, weighing up to a half
pound. In making, the curds are set on a straw mat in molds, for the
whey to run away. They are salted and turned after two days to salt
the other side. They ripen in three weeks with a very pleasing flavor.

Gammelost
_Norway_

Hard, golden-brown, sour-milker. After being pressed it is turned
daily for fourteen days and then packed in a chest with wet straw. So
far as we are concerned it can stay there. The color all the way
through is tobacco-brown and the taste, too. It has been compared to
medicine, chewing tobacco, petrified Limburger, and worse. In his
_Encyclopedia of Food_ Artemas Ward says that in Gammelost the
ferments absorb so much of the curd that "in consequence, instead of
eating cheese flavored by fungi, one is practically eating fungi
flavored with cheese."

Garda
_Italy_

Soft, creamy, fermented. A truly fine product made in the resort town
on Gardasee where d'Annunzio retired. It is one of those luscious
little ones exported in tin foil to America, and edible, including the
moldy crust that could hardly be called a rind.

Garden
_U.S.A._

Cream cheese with some greens or vegetables mixed in.

Garlic
_U.S.A._

A processed Cheddar type flavored with garlic.

Garlic-onion Link
_U.S.A._

A strong processed Cheddar put up to look like links of sausage,
nobody knows why.

Gascony, Fromage de _see Castillon._

Gautrias
_Mayenne, France_

Soft, cylinder weighing about five pounds and resembling Port-Salut.

Gavot
_Hautes-Alpes, France_

A good Alpine cheese whether made of sheep, goat or cow milk.

Geheimrath
_Netherlands_

A factory cheese turned out in small quantities. The color is deep
yellow and it resembles a Baby Gouda in every way, down to the weight

Gérardmer, de _see_ Récollet

German-American adopted types

Bierkäse
Delikat
Grinnen
Hand
Harzkäse
Kümmelkäse
Koppen
Lager
Liederkranz
Mein Kaese
Münster
Old Heidelberg
Schafkäse (sheep)
Silesian
Stein
Tilsit
Weisslack (piquant like Bavarian Allgäuer)

Géromé, la
_Vosges, France_

Semihard: cylinders up to eleven pounds; brick-red rind; like Münster,
but larger. Strong, fragrant and flavorsome, sometimes with aniseed.
It stands high at home, where it is in season from October to April.

Gervais
_Ile-de-France, France_

Cream cheese like Neufchâtel, long made by Maison Gervais, near Paris.
Sold in tiny tin-foil squares not much larger than old-time yeast.
Like Petit Suisse, it makes a perfect luncheon dessert with honey.

Gesundheitkäse, Holsteiner _see_ Holstein Health.

Getmesost
_Sweden_

Soft; goat; whey; sweet.

Gex
_Pays de Gex, France_

Semihard; skim milk; blue-veined. A "little" Roquefort in season from
November to May.

Gex Marbré
_France_

A very special type marbled with rich milks of cow, goat and sheep,
mixed. A full-flavored ambassador of the big international Blues
family, that are green in spite of their name.

Gien _see_ Fromage à la Crème.

Gislev
_Scandinavia_

Hard; mild, made from skimmed cow's milk.

Gjetost
_Norway_

A traditional chocolate-colored companion piece to Gammelost, but made
with goat's milk.

Glavis
_Switzerland_

The brand name of a cone of Sapsago. (_See_.)

Glattkäse, or Gelbkäse
_Germany_

Smooth cheese or yellow cheese. A classification of sour-milkers that
includes Olmützer Quargel.

Cloire des Montagnes _see_ Damen.

Gloucester
_Gloucestershire, England_

There are two types:
 I. Double, the better of the two Gloucesters, is eaten only after six
    months of ripening. "It has a pronounced, but mellow, delicacy of
    flavor...the tiniest morsel being pregnant with savour. To measure
    its refinement, it can undergo the same comparison as that we apply
    to vintage wines. Begin with a small piece of Red Cheshire. If you
    then pass to a morsel of Double Gloucester, you will find that the
    praises accorded to the latter have been no whit exaggerated."
    _A Concise Encyclopedia of Gastronomy,_ by André L. Simon.
II. Single. By way of comparison, the spring and summer Single Gloucester
    ripens in two months and is not as big as its "large grindstone"
    brother. And neither is it "glorified Cheshire." It is mild and
    "as different in qualify of flavour as a young and crisp wine is
    from an old vintage."

Glumse
_West Prussia, Germany_

A common, undistinguished cottage cheese.

Glux
_Nivernais, France_

Season, all year.

Goat
_France_

A frank and fair name for a semihard, brittle mouthful of flavor.
Every country has its goat specialties. In Norway the milk is boiled
dry, then fresh milk or cream added. In Czechoslovakia the peasants
smoke the cheese up the kitchen chimney. No matter how you slice it,
goat cheese is always notable or noble.

Gold-N-Rich
_U.S.A._

Golden in color and rich in taste. Bland, as American taste demands.
Like Bel Paese but not so full-flavored and a bit sweet. A good and
deservedly popular cheese none the less, easily recognized by its red
rind.

Gomost
_Norway_

Usually made from cow's milk, but sometimes from goat's. Milk is
curdled with rennet and condensed by heating until it has a
butter-like consistency. (_See_ Mysost.)

Gorgonzola
_Italy_

Besides the standard type exported to us (_See_ Chapter 3.) there is
White Gorgonzola, little known outside Italy where it is enjoyed by
local caseophiles, who like it put up in crocks with brandy, too.

Gouda _see_ Chapter 3.

Gouda, Kosher
_Holland_

The same semihard good Gouda, but made with kosher rennet. It is a bit
more mellow than most and, like all kosher products, is stamped by the
Jewish authorities who prepare it.

Goya
_Corrientes, Argentine_

Hard, dry, Italian type for grating. Like all fine Argentine cheeses
the milk of pedigreed herds fed on prime pampas grass distinguishes
Goya from lesser Parmesan types, even back in Italy.

It is interesting that the nitrate in Chilean soil makes their wines
the best in America, and the richness of Argentine milk does the same
for their cheeses, most of which are Italian imitations and some of
which excel the originals.

Gournay
_Seine, France_

Soft, similar to Demi-sel, comes in round and flat forms about 1/4
pound in weight. Those shaped like Bondons resemble corks about 3/4 of
an inch thick and four inches long.

Grana
_Italy_

Another name for Parmesan. From "grains", the size of big shot, that
the curd is cut into.

Grana Lombardo
_Lombardy_

The same hard type for grating, named
after its origin in Lombardy.

Grana Reggiano
_Reggio, Italy_

A brand of Parmesan type made near Reggio and widely imitated, not
only in Lombardy and Mantua, but also in the Argentine where it goes
by a pet name of its own--Regianito.

Grande Bornand, la
_Switzerland_

A luscious half-dried sheep's milker.

Granular curd _see_ Stirred curd.

Gras, or Velvet Kaas
_Holland_

Named from its butterfat content and called "Moors Head", _Tête de
Maure_, in France, from its shape and size. The same is true of
Fromage de Gras in France, called _Tête de Mort_, "Death's Head". Gras
is also the popular name for Brie that's made in the autumn in France
and sold from November to May. (_See_ Brie.)

Gratairon
_France_

Goat milk named, as so many are, from the place it is made.

Graubünden
_Switzerland_

A luscious half-dried sheep's milker.

Green Bay
_U.S.A._

Medium-sharp, splendid White Cheddar from Green Bay, Wisconsin, the
Limburger county.

Grey
_Germany and Austrian Tyrol_

Semisoft; sour skim milk with salty flavor from curing in brine bath.
Named from the gray color that pervades the entire cheese when ripe.
It has a very pleasant taste.

Gruyère _see_ Chapter 3.

Güssing, or Land-l-kas
_Austria_

Similar to Brick. Skim milk. Weight between four and eight pounds.


H

Habas _see_ Caille.

Hablé Crème Chantilly
_Ösmo, Sweden_

Soft ripened dessert cheese made from pasteurized cream by the old
Walla Creamery. Put up in five-ounce wedge-shaped boxes for export and
sold for a high price, well over two dollars a pound, in fancy big
city groceries. Truly an aristocrat of cheeses to compare with the
finest French Brie or Camembert. _See_ Chapter 3.

Hand _see_ Chapter 3.

Hard
_Puerto Rico_

Dry; tangy.

Harzkäse, Harz
_Harz Mountains, Germany_

Tiny hand cheese. Probably the world's smallest soft cheese, varying
from 2-1/2 inches by 1-1/2 down to 1/4 by 1-1/2. Packed in little
boxes, a dozen together, rubbing rinds, as close as sardines. And like
Harz canaries, they thrive on seeds, chiefly caraway.

Harzé
_Belgium_

Port-Salut type from the Trappist monastery
at Harzé.

Hasandach
_Turkey_

Bland; sweet.

Hauskäse.
_Germany_

Limburger type. Disk-shaped.

Haute Marne
_France_

Soft; square.

Hay, or Fromage au Foin
_Seine, France_

A skim-milker resembling "a poor grade of Livarot." Nothing to write
home about, except that it is ripened on new-mown hay.

Hazebrook

There are two kinds:

 I. Flemish; a Fromage Fort type with white wine, juniper, salt and
    pepper. Excessively strong for bland American tasters.

II. Franche-Comté, France; small dry goat's milker, pounded, potted and
    marinated in a mixture of thyme, tarragon, leeks, pepper and brandy.

Head

Four cheeses are called Head:

The French Death's Head.
Swiss Monk's Head.
Dutch Cat's Head.
Moor's Head.

There's headcheese besides but that's made of a pig's head and is only
a cheese by discourtesy.

Health _see_ Holstein.

Herbesthal
_Germany_

Named from a valley full of rich _herbes_ for grazing.

Herkimer
_U.S.A._

Cheddar type; nearly white. _See_ Chapter 4.

Herrgårdsost, Farm House or Manor House
_West Gothland and Jamtland, Sweden_

Hard Emmentaler type in two qualities: full cream and half cream.
Weighs 25 to 40 pounds. It is the most popular cheese in all Sweden
and the best is from West Gothland and Jutland.

Herrgårdstyp _see_ Hushållsost.

Hervé
_Belgium_

Soft; made in cubes and peppered with _herbes_ such as tarragon,
parsley and chives. It flourishes from November to May and comes in
three qualities: extra cream, cream, and part skim milk.

Hickory Smoked
_U.S.A._

Good smoke is often wasted on bad cheese.

Hohenburg _see_ Box No. II.

Hohenheim
_Germany_

Soft; part skimmed milk; half-pound cylinders. (See Box No. I.)

Hoi Poi
_China_

Soybean cheese, developed by vegetable rennet. Exported in jars.

Hoja _see_ Queso de.

Hollander
_North Germany_

Imitation Dutch Goudas and Edams, chiefly from Neukirchen in Holstein.

Holstein Dairy _see_ Leather.

Holsteiner, or Old Holsteiner
_Germany_

Eaten best when old, with butter, or in the North, with dripping.

Holstein Health, or Holsteiner Gesundheitkäse
_Germany_

Sour-milk curd pressed hard and then cooked in a tin kettle with a
little cream and salt. When mixed and melted it is poured into
half-pound molds and cooled.

Holstein Skim Milk or Holstein Magerkäse
_Germany_

Skim-milker colored with saffron. Its name, "thin cheese," tells all.

Hop, Hopfen
_Germany_

Small, one inch by 2-1/2 inches, packed in hops to ripen. An ideal
beer cheese, loaded with lupulin.

Hopi
_U.S.A._

Hard; goat; brittle; sharp; supposed to have been made first by the
Hopi Indians out west where it's still at home.

Horner's
_England_

An old cream cheese brand in Redditch where Worcestershire sauce
originated.

Horse Cheese

Not made of mare's milk, but the nickname for Caciocavallo because of
the horse's head used to trademark the first edition of it.

Hum
_Holland_

Brand name of one of those mild little red Baby Goudas that make you
say "Ho-hum."

Hushållsost, Household Cheese
_Sweden_

Popular in three types:
Herrgårdstyp--Farmhouse
Västgötatyp--Westgotland
Sveciatyp--Swedish

Hvid Gjetost
_Norway_

A strong variety of Gjetost, little known and less liked outside of
Scandinavia.


I

Icelandic

In _Letters from Iceland_, W.H. Auden says: "The ordinary cheese is
like a strong Dutch and good. There is also a brown sweet cheese, like
the Norwegian." Doubtless the latter is Gjetost.

Ihlefield
_Mecklenburg, Germany_

A hand cheese.

Ilha, Queijo de
_Azores_

Semihard "Cheese of the Isle," largely exported to mother Portugal,
measuring about a foot across and four inches high. The one word,
_Ilha_, Isle, covers the several Azorian Islands whose names, such as
_Pico_, Peak, and _Terceiro_, Third, are sometimes added to their
cheeses.

Impérial, Ancien _see_ Ancien.

Imperial Club
_Canada_

Potted Cheddar; snappy; perhaps named after the famous French Ancien
Impérial.

Incanestrato
_Sicily, Italy_

Very sharp; white; cooked; spiced; formed into large round "heads"
from fifteen to twenty pounds. _See_ Majocchino, a kind made with the
three milks, goat, sheep and cow, and enriched with olive oil besides.

Irish Cheeses

Irish Cheddar and Irish Stilton are fairly ordinary imitations named
after their native places of manufacture: Ardagh, Galtee, Whitehorn,
Three Counties, etc.

Isigny
_France_

Full name Fromage à la Crème d'Isigny. _(See.)_ Cream cheese. The
American cheese of this name never amounted to much. It was an attempt
to imitate Camembert in the Gay Nineties, but it turned out to be
closer to Limburger. (_See_ Chapter 2.)

In France there is also Crème d'Isigny, thick fresh cream that's as
famous as England's Devonshire and comes as close to being cheese as
any cream can.

Island of Orléans
_Canada_

This soft, full-flavored cheese was doubtless brought from France by
early emigrés, for it has been made since 1869 on the Orléans Island
in the St. Lawrence River near Quebec. It is known by its French name,
Le Fromage Raffiné de l'Ile d'Orléans, and lives up to the name
"refined."


J

Jack _see_ Monterey.

Jochberg
_Tyrol, Germany_

Cow and goat milk mixed in a fine Tyrolean product, as all mountain
cheese are. Twenty inches in diameter and four inches high, it weighs
in at forty-five pounds with the rind on.

Jonchée
_Santonge, France_

A superior Caillebotte, flavored with rum, orange-flower water or,
uniquely, black coffee.

Josephine
_Silesia, Germany_

Soft and ladylike as its name suggests. Put up in small cylindrical
packages.

Journiac _see_ Chapter 3.

Julost
_Sweden_.

Semihard; tangy.

Jura Bleu, or Septmoncel
_France_

Hard: blue-veined; sharp; tangy.


K

Kaas, Oude
_Belgium_

Flemish name for the French Boule de Lille.

Kackavalj
_Yugoslavia_

Same as Italian Caciocavallo.

Kaiser-käse
_Germany_

This was an imperial cheese in the days of the kaisers and is still
made under that once awesome name. Now it's just a jolly old mellow,
yellow container of tang.

Kajmar, or Serbian Butter
_Serbia and Turkey_

Cream cheese, soft and bland when young but ages to a tang between
that of any goat's-milker and Roquefort.

Kamembert
_Yugoslavia_

Imitation Camembert.

Karaghi La-La
_Turkey_

Nutty and tangy.

Kareish
_Egypt_

A pickled cheese, similar to Domiati.

Karut
_India_

Semihard; mellow; for grating and seasoning.

Karvi
_Norway_

Soft; caraway-seeded; comes in smallish packages.

Kash
_Rumania_

Soft, white, somewhat stringy cheese named cheese.

Kashcavallo, Caskcaval
_Greece_

A good imitation of Italian Caciocavallo.

Kasher, or Caher, Penner
_Turkey_

Hard; white; sharp.

Kash Kwan
_Bulgaria and the Balkans_

An all-purpose goat's milk, Parmesan type, eaten sliced when young,
grated when old. An attempt to imitate it in Chicago failed. It is
sold in Near East quarters in New York, Washington and all big
American cities.

Kaskaval
_Rumania_

Identical with Italian Caciocavallo, widely imitated, and well, in
Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Transylvania and neighboring lands. As
popular as Cheddar in England, Canada and U.S.A.

Kasseri
_Greece_

Hard; ewe's milk, usually.

Katschkawalj
_Serbia_

Just another version of the international Caciocavallo.

Katzenkopf, Cat's Head
_Holland_

Another name for Edam. (_See_ Chapter 3.)

Kaukauna Club
_U.S.A._

Widely advertised processed cheese food.

Kauna
_Lithuania_

A hearty cheese that's in season all the year around.

Kefalotir, Kefalotyi
_Yugoslavia, Greece and Syria_

Both of these hard, grating cheeses are made from either goat's or
ewe's milk and named after their shape, resembling a Greek hat, or
Kefalo.

Keg-ripened
_see_ Brand.

King Christian IX
_Denmark_
Sharp with caraway. Popular with
everybody.

Kingdom Farm
_U.S.A, near Ithaca, N.Y._
The Rutherfordites or Jehovah's Witnesses make Brick, Limburger and
Münster that are said to be most delectable by those mortals lucky
enough to get into the Kingdom Farm. Unfortunately their cheese is not
available elsewhere.

Kirgischerkäse _see_ Krutt.

Kjarsgaard
_Denmark_

Hard; skim; sharp; tangy.

Klatschkäse, Gossip Cheese
_Germany_

A rich "ladies' cheese" corresponding to Damen; both designed to
promote the flow of gossip in afternoon _Kaffee-klatsches_ in the
_Konditories_.

Kloster, Kloster Käse
_Bavaria_

Soft; ripe; finger-shaped, one by one by four inches. In Munich this
was, and perhaps still is, carried by brew masters on their tasting
tours "to bring out the excellence of a freshly broached tun." Named
from being made by monks in early cloisters, down to this day.

Kochenkäse
_Luxembourg_

Cooked white dessert cheese. Since it is salt-free it is recommended
for diets.

Koch Käse
_Germany_

This translates "cooked cheese."

Kochtounkäse
_Belgium_

Semisoft, cooked and smoked. Bland flavor.

Kolos-monostor
_Rumania_

Sheep; rectangular four-pounder, 8-1/2 by five by three inches. One of
those college-educated cheeses turned out by the students and
professors at the Agricultural School of Transylvania.

Kolosvarer
_Rumania_

A Trappist Port-Salut imitation made with water-buffalo milk, as are
so many of the world's fine cheeses.

Komijnekaas, Komynekass
_North Holland_

Spiked with caraway seeds and named after them.

Konigskäse
_Germany_

A regal name for a German imitation of Bel Paese.

Kopanisti
_Greece_

Blue-mold cheese with sharp, peppery flavor.

Koppen, Cup, or Bauden
_Germany_

Semihard; goat; made in a cup-shaped mold that gives both its shape
and name. Small, three to four ounces; sharp; pungent; somewhat smoky.
Imitated in U.S.A. in half-pound packages.

Korestin
_Russia_

Semisoft; mellow; cured in brine.

Kosher

This cheese appears in many countries under several names. Similar to
Limburger, but eaten fresh. It is stamped genuine by Jewish
authorities, for the use of religious persons. (_See_ Gouda, Kosher.)

Krauterkäse
_Brazil_

Soft-paste herb cheese put up in a tube by German Brazilians near the
Argentine border. A rich, full-flavored adaptation of Swiss
Krauterkäse even though it is processed.

Kreuterkäse, Herb Cheese
_Switzerland_

Hard, grating cheese flavored with
herbs; like Sapsago or Grunkäse.

Krutt, or Kirgischerkäse
_Asian Steppes_

A cheese turned out en route by nomadic tribes in the Asiatic Steppes,
from sour skim milk of goat, sheep, cow or camel. The salted and
pressed curd is made into small balls and dried in the sun.

Kühbacher
_Bavaria_

Soft, ripe, and chiefly interesting because of its name, Cow Creek,
where it is made.

Kuminost
_Norway_

Semihard; caraway-seeded.

Kumminost
_Sweden_

This is Bondost with caraway added.

Kummin Ost
_Wisconsin, U.S.A._

Imitation of the Scandinavian, with small production in Wisconsin
where so many Swedes and Norwegians make their home and their _ost_.

Kümmel, Leyden, or Leidsche Kaas
_Holland_

Caraway-seeded and named.

Kümmelkäse
_Germany and U.S.A._

Semihard; sharp with caraway. Milwaukee Kümmelkäse has made a name for
itself as a nibble most suitable with most drinks, from beer to
imported kümmel liqueur.


L

Labneh
_Syria_

Sour-milk.

La Foncée, or Fromage de Pau
_France_

Cream cheese.

Lager Käse
_U.S.A._

Semidry and mellow. While _lager_ means merely "to store," there is
more than a subtle suggestion of lager beer here.

Laguiole, Fromage de, and Guiole
_Aveyron, France_

An ancient Cantal type said to have flourished since the Roman
occupation. Many consider Laguiole superior to Cantal. It is in full
season from November to May.

Lamothe-Bougon, La Mothe St. Heray
_Poitou_

Goat cheese made from May to November.

Lancashire, or Lancaster
_North England_

White; crumbly; sharp; a good Welsh Rabbit cheese if you can get it.
It is more like Cheshire than Cheddar. This most popular variety in
the north of England is turned out best at Fylde, near the Irish Sea.
It is a curiosity in manufacture, for often the curds used are of
different ages, and this is accountable for a loose, friable texture.
Deep orange in color.

Land-l-kas, or Güssing
_Austria_

Skim-milker, similar to U.S. Brick. Square loaves, four to eight pounds.

Langlois Blue
_U.S.A._

A Colorado Blue with an excellent reputation, though it can hardly
compete with Roquefort.

Langres
_Haute-Marne, France_

Semihard; fermented whole milk; farm-made; full-flavored,
high-smelling Limburger type, similar to Maroilles. Ancient of days,
said to have been made since the time of the Merovingian kings.
Cylindrical, five by eight inches, they weigh one and a half to two
pounds. Consumed mostly at home.

Lapland
_Lapland_

Reindeer milk. Resembles hard Swiss. Of unusual shape, both round and
flat, so a cross-section looks like a dumbbell with angular ends.

Laredo
_Mexico_

Soft; creamy; mellow, made and named after the North Mexico city.

Larron
_France_

A kind of Maroilles.

Latticini
_Italy_

Trade name for a soft, water-buffalo product as creamy as Camembert.

Laumes, les
_Burgundy, France_

Made from November to July.

Lauterbach
_Germany_

Breakfast cheese

Leaf _see_ Tschil.

Leather, Leder, or Holstein Dairy
_Germany_

A skim-milker with five to ten percent buttermilk, all from the great
_milch_ cows up near Denmark in Schleswig-Holstein. A technical point
in its making is that it's "broken up with a harp or a stirring stick
and stirred with a Danish stirrer."

Lebanie
_Syria_

Dessert cottage cheese often served with yogurt.

Lecco, Formaggini di
_Italy_

Soft; cow or goat; round dessert variety; representative of a cheese
family as big as the human family of most Italians.

Lees _see_ Appenzeller, Festive, No. II.

LeGuéyin
_Lorraine, France_

Half-dried; small; salted; peppered and sharp. The salt _and_ pepper
make it unusual, though not as peppery as Italian Pepato.

Leicester
_England_

Hard; shallow; flat millstone of Cheddar-like cheese weighing forty
pounds. Dark orange and mild to red and strong, according to age. With
Wiltshire and Warwickshire it belongs to the Derbyshire type.

An ancient saying is: "Leicester cheese and water cress were just made
for each other."

Leidsche Kaas _see_ Leyden.

Leonessa

A kind of Pecorino.

Leroy
_U.S.A._

Notable because it's a natural cheese in a mob of modern processed.

Lerroux
_France_

Goat; in season from February to September and not eaten in fall or
winter months.

Lescin
_Caucasus_

Curious because the sheep's milk that makes it is milked directly into
a sack of skin. It is made in the usual way, rennet added, curd broken
up, whey drained off, curd put into forms and pressed lightly. But
after that it is wrapped in leaves and ropes of grass. After curing
two weeks in the leaves, they are discarded, the cheese salted and
wrapped up in leaves again for another ripening period.

The use of a skin sack again points the association of cheese and wine
in a region where wine is still drunk from skin bags with nozzles, as
in many wild and mountainous parts.

Les Petits Bressans
_Bresse, France_

Small goat cheeses named from food-famous Bresse, of the plump
pullets, and often stimulated with brandy before being wrapped in
fresh vine leaves, like Les Petits Banons.

Les Petits Fromages _see_ Petits Fromages and Thiviers.

Le Vacherin

Name given to two entirely different varieties:
 I. Vacherin à la Main
II. Vacherin Fondu. (_See_ Vacherin.)

Levroux
_Berry, France_

A goat cheese in season from May to December.

Leyden, Komijne Kaas, Caraway Cheese
_Holland_

Semihard, tangy with caraway. Similar Delft. There are two kinds of
Leyden that might be called Farm Fat and Factory Thin, for those made
on the farms contain 30 to 35% fat, against 20% in the factory
product.

Liederkranz _see_ Chapter 4.

Limburger _see_ Chapter 3.

Lincoln
_England_

Cream cheese that keeps two to three weeks. This is in England, where
there is much less refrigeration than in the U.S.A., and that's a big
break for most natural cheeses.

Lindenhof
_Belgium_

Semisoft; aromatic; sharp.

Lipta, Liptauer, Liptoiu
_Hungary_

A classic mixture with condiments, especially the great peppers from
which the world's best paprika is made. Liptauer is the regional name
for Brinza, as well, and it's made in the same manner, of sheep milk
and sometimes cow. Salty and spready, somewhat oily, as most
sheep-milkers are. A fairly sharp taste with a suggestion of sour
milk. It is sold in various containers and known as "pickled cheese."
(_See_ Chapter 3.)

Lipto
_Hungary_

Soft; sheep; white; mild and milky taste. A close relative of both
Liptauer and Brinza.

Little Nippy
_U.S.A._

Processed cheese with a cute name, wrapped up both plain and smoky, to
"slice and serve for cheese trays, mash or whip for spreading," but no
matter how you slice, mash and whip it, it's still processed.

Livarot
_Calvados, France_

Soft paste, colored with annatto-brown or deep red (also, uncommonly,
fresh and white). It has the advantage over Camembert, made in the
same region, in that it may be manufactured during the summer months
when skim milk is plentiful and cheap. It is formed in cylinders, six
by two inches, and ripened several months in the even temperature of
caves, to be eaten at its best only in January, February and March. By
June and afterward it should be avoided. Similar to Mignot II. Early
in the process of making, after ripening ten to twelve days, the
cheeses are wrapped in fresh _laiche_ leaves, both to give flavor and
help hold in the ammonia and other essentials for making a strong,
piquant Livarot.

Livlander
_Russia_

A popular hand cheese. A most unusual variety because the cheese
itself is red, not the rind.

Locatelli
_Italy_

A brand of Pecorino differing slightly from Bomano Pecorino.

Lodigiano, or Lombardo
_Lodi, Italy_

Sharp; fragrant; sometimes slightly bitter; yellow. Cylindrical;
surface colored dark and oiled. Used for grating. Similar to Parmesan
but not as fine in quality.

Longhorn
_Wisconsin, U.S.A._

This fine American Cheddar was named from its resemblance to the long
horn of a popular milking breed of cattle, or just from the Longhorn
breed of cow that furnished the makings.

Lorraine
_Lorraine, Germany_

Hard; small; delicate; unique because it's seasoned with pistachio
nuts besides salt and pepper. Eaten while quite young, in two-ounce
portions that bring a very high price.

Lumburger
_Belgium_

Semisoft and tangy dessert cheese. The opposite of Limburger because
it has no odor.

Lunch
_Germany and U.S.A._

The same as Breakfast and Frühstück. A Limburger type of eye-opener.

Lüneberg
_West Austria_

Swiss type; saffron-colored; made in a copper kettle; not as strong as
Limburger, or as mild as Emmentaler, yet piquant and aromatic, with a
character of its own.

Luxembourg
_U.S.A._

Tiny tin-foiled type of Liederkranz. A mild, bland, would-be Camembert.


M

Maconnais
_France_

Soft; goat's milk; two inches square by one and a half inches thick.

Macqueline
_Oise, France_

Soft Camembert type, made in the same region, but sold at a cheaper
price.

Madridejos
_Spain_

Named for Madrid where it is made.

Magdeburger-kuhkäse
_Germany_

"Cow cheese" made in Magdeburg.

Magerkäse _see_ Holstein Skim Milk

Maggenga, Sorte
_Italy_

A term for Parmesan types made between April and September.

Maguis
_Belgium_

Also called Fromage Mou. Soft; white; sharp; spread.

Maigre
_France_

A name for Brie made in summer and inferior to both the winter Gras
and spring Migras.

Maile
_Crimea_

Sheep; cooked; drained; salted; made into forms and put into a brine
bath where it stays sometimes a year.

Maile Pener (Fat Cheese)
_Crimea_

Sheep; crumbly; open texture and pleasing flavor when ripened.

Mainauer
_German_

Semihard; full cream; round; red outside, yellow within. Weight three
pounds.

Mainzer Hand
_German_

Typical hand cheese, kneaded by hand thoroughly, which makes for
quality, pressed into flat cakes by hand, dried for a week, packed in
kegs or jars and ripened in the cellar six to eight weeks. As in
making bread, the skill in kneading Mainzer makes a worthy craft.

Majocchino
_Sicily, Italy_

An exceptional variety of the three usual milks mixed together: goat,
sheep and cow, flavored with spices and olive oil. A kind of
Incanestrato.

Malakoff
_France_

A form of Neufchâtel about a half inch by two inches, eaten fresh or
ripe.

Manicamp
_French Flanders_

In season from October to July.

Mano, Queso de
_Venezuela_

A kind of Venezuelan hand cheese, as its Spanish name translates.
(_See_ Venezuelan.)

Manor House _see_ Herrgårdsost.

Manteca, Butter
_Italy_

Cheese and butter combined in a small brick of butter with a covering
of Mozzarella. This is for slicing--not for cooking--which is unusual
for any Italian cheese.

Manur, or Manuri
_Yugoslavia_

Sheep or cow's milk heated to boiling, then cooled "until the fingers
can be held in it". A mixture of fresh whey and buttermilk is added
with the rennet. "The curd is lifted from the whey in a cloth and
allowed to drain, when it is kneaded like bread, lightly salted, and
dried."

Maqueé
_Belgium_

Another name for Fromage Mou, Soft Cheese.

Marches
_Tuscany, Italy_

Ewe's milk; hard.

Margarine
_England_

An oily cheese made with oleomargarine.

Margherita
_Italy_

Soft; cream; small.

Marienhofer
_Austria_

Limburger type. About 4-1/2 inches square and 1-1/2 inches thick;
weight about a pound. Wrapped in tin foil.

Märkisch, or Märkisch Hand
_Germany_

Soft; smelly; hand type.

Maroilles, Marolles, Marole
_Flanders, France_

Semisoft and semihard, half way between Pont l'Evêque and Limburger.
Full flavor, high smell, reddish brown rind, yellow within. Five
inches square and 2-1/4 inches thick; some larger.

Martha Washington Aged Cheese
_U.S.A._

Made by Kasper of Bear Creek, Wisconsin. (_See under_ Wisconsin in
Chapter 4.)

Mascarpone, or Macherone
_Italy_

Soft; white; delicate fresh cream from Lombardy. Usually packed in
muslin or gauze bags, a quarter to a half pound.

McIntosh
_Alaska_

An early Klondike Cheddar named by its maker, Peter McIntosh, and
described as being as yellow as that "Alaskan gold, which brought at
times about ounce for ounce over mining-camp counters." _The Cheddar
Box_ by Dean Collins.

McLaren's
_U.S.A._

Pioneer club type of snappy Cheddar in a pot, originally made in
Canada, now by Kraft in the U.S.A.

Meadowbloom
_U.S.A._

Made by the Iowa State College at Ames.

Mecklenburg Skim
_Germany_

No more distinguished than most skim-milkers.

Meilbou
_France_

Made in the Champagne district.

Mein Käse
_U.S.A._

Sharp; aromatic; trade-marked package.

Melfa
_U.S.A._

Excellent for a processed cheese. White; flavorsome. Packed in half
moons.

Melun
_France_
Brown-red rind, yellow inside; high-smelling. There is also a Brie de
Melun.

Mentelto
_Italy_
Sharp; goat; from the Mentelto mountains

Merignac
_France_
Goat.

Merovingian
_Northeast France_
Semisoft; white; creamy; sharp; historic since the time of the
Merovingian kings.

Mersem
_France_
Lightly cooked.

Mesitra
_Crimea_
Eaten when fresh and unsalted; also when ripened. Soft, ewe's milk.

Mesost
_Sweden_
Whey; sweetish.

Metton
_Franche-Comté, France_
Season October to June.

Meuse
_France_
Soft; piquant; aromatic.

Midget Salami Provolone
_U.S.A._
This goes Baby Goudas and Edams one better by being a sort of sausage,
too.

Mignot
_Calvados, France_
_White, No. I:_ Soft; fresh; in small cubes or cylinders; in season
only in summer, April to September.

_Passe, No. II:_ Soft but ripened, and in the same forms, but only
seasonal in winter, October to March. Similar to Pont l'Evêque and
popular for more than a century. It goes specially well with Calvados
cider, fresh, hard or distilled.

Migras

Name given to spring Brie--midway between fat winter Gras and thin
summer Maigre.

Milano, Stracchino di Milano, Fresco, Quardo
_Italy_

Similar to Bel Paese. Yellow, with thin rind. 1-1/2 to 2-3/4 inches
thick, 3 to 6-1/2 pounds.

Milk Mud _see_ Schlickermilch.

Millefiori
_Milan, Italy_

A Thousand Flowers--as highly scented as its sentimental name. Yet no
cheeses are so freshly fragrant as these flowery Alpine ones.

Milltown Bar
_U.S.A._

Robust texture and flavor reminiscent of free-lunch and old-time bars.

Milk cheeses

Milks that make cheese around the world:

Ass
Buffalo
Camel
Chamois
Elephant
Goat
Human (_see_ Mother's milk)
Llama
Mare
Reindeer
Sea cow (Amazonian legend)
Sheep
Whale (legendary; see Whale Cheese)
Yak
Zebra
Zebu

U.S. pure food laws prohibit cheeses made of unusual or strange
animal's milk, such as camel, llama and zebra.

Milwaukee Kümmelkäse
and Hand Käse
_U.S.A._

Aromatic with caraway, brought from Germany by early emigrants and
successfully imitated.

Minas
_Brazil_

Name for the Brazilian state of Minas Geraes, where it is made.
Semihard; white; round two-pounder; often chalky. The two best brands
are one called Primavera, Spring, and another put out by the Swiss
professors who teach the art at the Agricultural University in the
State Capital, Bello Horizonte.

Minnesota Blue
_U.S.A._

A good national product known from coast to coast. Besides Blue,
Minnesota makes good all-American Brick and Cheddar, natural nationals
to be proud of.

Mintzitra
_in Macedonia; and_
Mitzithra
_in Greece_

Sheep; soft; succulent; and as pleasantly greasy as other sheep
cheeses from Greece. It's a by-product of the fabulous Feta.

Modena, Monte
_U.S.A._

Made in U.S.A. during World War II. Parmesan-type.

Mohawk Limburger
Spread
_U.S.A._

A brand that comes in one-pound jars.

Moliterno
_Italy_

Similar to Caciocavallo. _(See.)_

Monceau
_Champagne, France_

Semihard, similar to Maroilles.

Moncenisio
_Italy_

Similar to Gorgonzola.

Mondseer, Mondseer Schachtelkäse, Mondseer Schlosskäse
_Austria_

This little family with a lot of long names is closely related to the
Münster tribe, with very distant connections with the mildest branch
of the Limburgers.

The Schachtelkäse is named from the wooden boxes in which it is
shipped, while the Schlosskäse shows its class by being called Castle
Cheese, probably because it is richer than the others, being made of
whole milk.

Money made of cheese
_China_

In the Chase National Bank collection of moneys of the world there is
a specimen of "Cheese money" about which the curator, Farran Zerbee,
writes: "A specimen of the so-called 'cheese money' of Northern China,
1850-70, now in the Chase Bank collection, came to me personally some
thirty years ago from a woman missionary, who had been located in the
field where she said a cake form of condensed milk, and referred to as
'cheese,' was a medium of exchange among the natives. It, like other
commodities, particularly compressed tea, was prized as a trading
medium in China, in that it had value as nutriment and was
sufficiently appreciated by the population as to be exchangeable for
other articles of service."

Monk's Head _see_ Tête de Moine.

Monostorer
_Transylvania, Rumania_

Ewe's milk.

Monsieur
_France_

Soft; salted; rich in flavor.

Monsieur Fromage _see_ Fromage de Monsieur Fromage.

Montana
_Catalonia_

A mountain cheese.

Montasio
_Austria and Italy_

Usually skimmed goat and cow milk mixed. When finished, the rind is
often rubbed with olive oil or blackened with soot. It is eaten both
fresh, white and sweet, and aged, when it is yellow, granular and
sharp, with a characteristic flavor. Mostly used when three to twelve
months old, but kept much longer and grated for seasoning. Widely
imitated in America.

Montauban de Bretagne, Fromage de
_Brittany, France_

A celebrated cheese of Brittany.

Montavoner
_Austria_

Sour and sometimes sweet milk, made tasty with dried herbs of the
_Achittea_ family.

Mont Blanc
_France_

An Alpine cheese.

Mont Cenis
_Southeastern France_
Usually made of all three available milks, cow, goat and sheep; it is
semihard and blue-veined like the other Roquefort imitations, Gex and
Septmoncel. Primitive methods are still used in the making and
sometimes the ripening is done by _penicillium_ introduced in moldy
bread. Large rounds, eighteen by six to eight inches, weighing
twenty-five pounds.

Mont-des-Cats
_French Flanders_

Trappist monk-made Port-Salut.

Montdidier
_France_

A fresh cream.

Mont d'or, le, or Mont Dore
_Lyonnais, France_

Soft; whole milk; originally goat, now cow; made throughout the Rhone
Valley. Fat, golden-yellow and "relished by financiers" according to
Victor Meusy. Between Brie and Pont l'Evêque but more delicate than
either, though not effeminate. Alpin and Riola are similar. The best
is still turned out at Mont d'Or, with runners-up in St. Cyr and St.
Didier.

Montavoner
_Austria_

A sour-milker made fragrant with herbs added to the curd.

Monterey
_Mexico_

Hard; sharp; perhaps inspired by Montery Jack that's made in
California and along the Mexican border.

Monterey Jack _see_ Chapter 4.

Monthéry
_Seine-et-Oise, France_

Whole or partly skimmed milk; soft in quality and large in size,
weighing up to 5-1/2 pounds. Notable only for its patriotic tri-color
in ripening, with whitish mold that turns blue and has red spots.

Montpellier
_France_

Sheep.

Moravian
_Czechoslovakia_

Semihard and sharp.

Morbier
_Bresse, France_

In season from November to July.

Mostoffait
_France_

A little-known product of Champagne.

Mother's milk

In his book about French varieties, _Les Fromages_, Maurice des
Ombiaux sums up the many exotic milks made into cheese and recounts
the story of Paul Bert, who served a cheese "white as snow" that was
so delicately appetizing it was partaken of in "religious silence."
All the guests guessed, but none was right. So the host announced it
was made of _"lait de femme"_ and an astounded turophile exclaimed,
"Then all of us are cannibals."

Mountain
_Bavaria_

Soft; yellow; sharp.

Mountain, Azuldoch _see_ Azuldoch.

Mount Hope
_U.S.A._

Yellow; mellow; mild and porous California Cheddar.

Mouse or Mouse Trap
_U.S.A._

Common name for young, green, cracked, leathery or rubbery low-grade
store cheese fit only to bait traps. When it's aged and sharp,
however, the same cheese can be bait for caseophiles.

Mozzarella
_Italy_

Soft; water-buffalo milk; moistly fresh and unripened; bland, white
cooking cheese put up in balls or big bowl-like cups weighing about a
half pound and protected with wax paper. The genuine is made at
Cardito, Aversa, Salernitano and in the Mazzoni di Capua. Like
Ricotta, this is such a popular cheese all over America that it is
imitated widely, and often badly, with a bitter taste.

Mozzarella-Affumicata, also called Scamozza
_Italy_

Semisoft; smooth; white; bland; un-salted. Put up in pear shapes of
about one pound, with tan rind, from smoking.

Eaten chiefly sliced, but prized, both fresh and smoked, in true
Italian one-dish meals such as Lasagne and Pizza.

Mozzarinelli
_Italy_

A pet name for a diminutive edition of Mozzarella.

Mrsav _see_ Sir Posny.

Münster
_Germany_

German originally, now made from Colmar, Strassburg and Copenhagen to
Milwaukee in all sorts of imitations, both good and bad. Semihard;
whole milk; yellow inside, brick-red outside; flavor from mild to
strong, depending on age and amount of caraway or anise seed added.
Best in winter season, from November to April.

Münster is a world-wide classic that doubles for both German and
French. Géromé is a standard French type of it, with a little longer
season, beginning in April, and a somewhat different flavor from anise
seed. Often, instead of putting the seeds inside, a dish of caraway is
served with the cheese for those who like to flavor to taste.

In Alsace, Münster is made plain and also under the name of Münster au
Cumin because of the caraway.

American imitations are much milder and marketed much younger. They
are supposed to blend the taste of Brick and Limburger; maybe they do.

Mustard
_U.S.A._

A processed domestic, Gruyère type.

Myjithra

Imitated with goat's milk in Southern Colorado.

Mysost, Mytost
_Scandinavia_

Made in all Scandinavian countries and imitated in the U.S.A. A whey
cheese, buttery, mild and sweetish with a caramel color all through,
instead of the heavy chocolate or dark tobacco shade of Gjetost.
Frimost is a local name for it. The American imitations are
cylindrical and wrapped in tin foil.


N

Nagelkassa (Fresh), Fresh Clove Cheese, called Nageles in Holland
_Austria_

Skim milk; curd mixed with caraway and cloves called nails, _nagel_,
in Germany and Austria. The large flat rounds resemble English Derby.

Nantais, or Fromage du Curé, Cheese of the Curate
_Brittany, France_

A special variety dedicated to some curate of Nantes.

Nessel
_England_

Soft; whole milk; round and very thin.

Neufchâtel, or Petit Suisse
_Normandy, France_

Soft; whole milk; small loaf. See Ancien Impérial, Bondon, and Chapter
9.

New Forest
_England_

Cream cheese from the New Forest district.

Nieheimer
_Westphalia, Germany_

Sour milk; with salt and caraway seed added, sometimes beer or milk.
Covered lightly with straw and packed in kegs with hops to ripen. Both
beer and hops in one cheese is unique.

Niolo
_Corsica_

In season from October to May.

Noekkelost or Nögelost
_Norway_

Similar to spiced Leyden or Edam with caraway, and shaped like a
Gouda.

Nordlands-Ost "Kalas"
_U.S.A._

Trade name for an American imitation of a Scandinavian variety,
perhaps suggested by Swedish Nordost.

Nordost
_Sweden_

Semisoft; white; baked; salty and smoky.

North Wilts
_Wiltshire, England_

Cheddar type; smooth; hard rind; rich but delicate in flavor. Small
size, ten to twelve pounds; named for its locale.

Nostrale
_Northwest Italy_

An ancient-of-days variety of which there are two kinds:
 I. _Formaggio Duro:_ hard, as its name says, made in the spring
    when the cows are in the valley.
II. _Formaggio Tenero:_ soft and richer, summer-made with milk
    from lush mountain-grazing.

Notruschki (cheese bread)
_Russia_

Made with Tworog cheese and widely popular.

Nova Scotia Smoked
_U.S.A._

The name must mean that the cheese was smoked in the Nova Scotia
manner, for it is smoked mostly in New York City, like sturgeon, to
give the luxurious flavor.

Nuworld
_U.S.A._

This semisoft newcomer arrived about 1954 and is advertised as a
brand-new variety. It is made in the Midwest and packed in small,
heavily waxed portions to preserve all of its fine, full aroma and
flavor.

A cheese all America can be proud of, whether it is an entirely new
species or not.


O

Oaxaca
_see_ Asadero.

Oka, or La Trappe
_Canada_

Medium soft; aromatic; the Port-Salut made by Trappist monks in Canada
after the secret method of the order that originated in France. _See_
Trappe.

Old English Club
_U.S.A._

Not old, not English, and representing no club we know of.

Old Heidelberg
_U.S.A._

Soft, piquant rival of Liederkranz.

Oléron Isle, Fromage d'Ile
_France_

A celebrated sheep cheese from this island of Oléron.

Olive Cream
_U.S.A._

Ground olives mixed to taste with cream cheese. Olives rival pimientos
for such mildly piquant blends that just suit the bland American
taste. A more exciting olive cream may be made with Greek Calatma
olives and Feta sheep cheese.

Olivet
_Orléans, France_

Soft sheep cheese sold in three forms:
  I. Fresh; summer, white; cream cheese.
 II. Olivet-Bleu--mold inoculated; half-ripened.
III. Olivet-Cendré, ripened in the ashes. Season, October to June.

Olmützer Quargel, also Olmützer Bierkäse
_Austria_

Soft; skim milk-soured; salty. The smallest of hand cheeses, only 1/2
of an inch thick by 1-1/2 inches in diameter. Packed in kegs to ripen
into beer cheese and keep the liquid contents of other kegs company. A
dozen of these little ones are packed together in a box ready to drop
into wine or beer drinks at home or at the bar.

Oloron, or Fromage de la Vallee d'ossour
_Béarn, France_

In season from October to May.

Onion with garlic links
_U.S.A_

Processed and put up like frankfurters, in links.

Oporto
_Portugal_

Hard; sharp; tangy. From the home town of port wine.

Orkney
_Scotland_

A country cheese of the Orkney Islands where it is buried in the oat
bin to ripen, and kept there between meals as well. Oatmeal and Scotch
country cheese are natural affinities. Southey, Johnson and Boswell
have all remarked the fine savor of such cheese with oatcakes.

Orléans
_France_

Named after the Orléans district Soft; creamy; tangy.

Ossetin, Tuschninsk, or Kasach
_Caucasus_

Comes in two forms:
 I. Soft and mild sheep or cow cheese ripened in brine for two months.
II. Hard, after ripening a year and more in brine. The type made of
    sheep milk is the better.

Ostiepek, Oschtjepek, Oschtjpeka
_Czechoslovakia_

Sheep in the Carpathian Mountains supply the herb-rich milk for this
type, similar to Italian Caciocavallo.

Oswego
_U.S.A._

New York State Cheddar of distinction.

Oude Kaas
_Belgium_

Popular in France as Boule de Lille.

Oust, Fromage de
_Roussillon, France_

Of the Camembert family.

Ovár
_Hungarian_

Semisoft to semihard, reddish-brown rind, reddish-yellow inside. Mild
but pleasantly piquant It has been called Hungarian Tilsit.

Oveji Sir
_Yugoslavian Alpine_

Hard, mountain-sheep cheese of quality Cellar-ripened three months.
Weight six to ten pounds.

Oxfordshire
_England_

An obsolescent type, now only of literary interest because of Jonathan
Swift's little story around it, in the eighteenth century:
     "An odd land of fellow, who when the cheese came upon the table,
     pretended to faint; so somebody said, Pray take away the cheese.'

     "'No,' said I, 'pray take away the fool. Said I well?'

     "To this Colonel Arwit rejoins: 'Faith, my lord, you served the
     coxcomb right enough; and therefore I wish we had a bit of your
     lordship's Oxfordshire cheese.'"


P

Pabstett
_U.S.A_

The Pabst beer people got this out during Prohibition, and although
beer and cheese are brothers under their ferment, and Prohibition has
long since been done away with, the relation of the processed paste
to a natural cheese is still as distant as near beer from regular
beer.

Packet cheese
_England_

This corresponds to our process cheese and is named from the package
or packet it comes in.

Paglia
_Switzerland_

Italian-influenced Canton of Ticino. Soft. A copy of Gorgonzola. A
Blue with a pleasant, aromatic flavor, and of further interest because
in Switzerland, the motherland of cheese, it is an imitation of a
foreign type.

Pago
_Dalmatia, Yugoslavia_

A sheep-milk specialty made on the island of Pago in Dalmatia, in
weights from 1/2 to eight pounds.

Paladru
_Savoy, France_

In season from November to May.

Palpuszta
_Hungary_

Fairly strong Limburger type.

Pannarone
_Italy_

Gorgonzola type with white curd but without blue veining.

Parenica
_Hungary_

Sheep. Caciocavallo type.

Parmesan, Parmigiano
_Italy_

The grand mogul of all graters. Called "The hardest cheese in the
world." It enlivens every course from onion soup to cheese straws with
the demitasse, and puts spirit into the sparse Lenten menu as _Pasta
al Pesto_, powdered Parmesan, garlic, olive oil and basil, pounded in
a mortar with a pestle.

Passauer Rahmkäse, Crème de Passau
_German_

Noted Bavarian cream cheese, known in France as Crème de Passau.

Pasta Cotta
_Italy_

The ball or _grana_ of curd used in making Parmesan.

Pasta Filata
_Italy_

A "drawn" curd, the opposite of the little balls or grains into which
Grana is chopped.(_See_ Formaggi di Pasta Filata.)

Pasteurized Process Cheese Food
_U.S.A._

This is the ultimate desecration of natural fermented cheese. Had
Pasteur but known what eventual harm his discovery would do to a world
of cheese, he might have stayed his hand.

Pastorella
_Italy_

Soft, rich table cheese.

Patagras
_Cuba_

Similar to Gouda.

Pecorino
_Italy_

Italian cheese made from ewe's milk. Salted in brine. Granular.

Pelardon de Rioms
_Languedoc, France_

A goat cheese in season from May to November.

Peneteleu
_Rumania_

One of the international Caciocavallo family.

Penicillium Glaucum and Penicillium Album

Tiny mushroom spores of _Penicillium Glaucum_ sprinkled in the curd
destined to become Roquefort, sprout and grow into "blue" veins that
impart the characteristic flavor. In twelve to fifteen days a second
spore develops on the surface, snow-white _Penicillium Album_.

Pennich
_Turkey_

Mellow sheep cheese packed in the skin of sheep or lamb.

Pennsylvania Hand Cheese
_U.S.A._

This German original has been made by the Pennsylvania Dutch ever
since they arrived from the old country. Also Pennsylvania pot, or
cooked.

Penroque
_Pennsylvania, U.S.A_

Cow milk imitation Roquefort, inoculated with _Penicillium Roqueforti_
and ripened in "caverns where nature has duplicated the ideal
condition of the cheese-curing caverns of France." So any failure of
Penroque to rival real Roquefort is more likely to be the fault of
mother cow than mother nature.

Pepato
_Italy_

Hard; stinging, with whole black peppers that make the lips burn. Fine
for fire-eaters.

An American imitation is made in Northern Michigan.

Persillé de Savoie
_Savoie, France_

In season from May to January, flavored with parsley in a manner
similar to that of sage in Vermont Cheddar.

Petafina, La
_Dauphiné, France_

Goat or cow milk mixed together, with yeast of dried cheese added,
plus salt and pepper, olive oil, brandy and absinthe.

Petit Carré
_France_

Fresh, unripened Ancien Impérial.

Petit Gruyère
_Denmark_

Imitation Gruyère, pasteurized, processed and made almost
unrecognizable and inedible. Six tin-foil wedges to a box; also
packaged with a couple of crackers for bars, one wedge for fifteen
cents, where free lunch is forbidden. This is a fair sample of one of
several foreign imitations that are actually worse than we can do at
home.

Petit Moule
_Ile-de-France, France_

A pet name for Coulommiers.

Petit Suisse
_France_

Fresh, unsalted cream cheese. The same as Neufchâtel and similar to
Coulommiers. It comes in two sizes:
  Gros--a largest cylinder
  Demi--a small one

Keats called this "the creamy curd," and another writer has praised
its "La Fontaine-like simplicity." Whether made in Normandy,
Switzerland, or Petropolis, Brazil, by early Swiss settlers, it is
ideal with honey.

Petit Vacher
_France_

"Little Cowboy," an appropriate name for a small cow's-milk cheese.

Petits Bourgognes
_Lower Burgundy, France_

Soft; sheep; white, small, tangy. Other notable Petits also beginning
with B are Banons and Bressans.

Petits Fromages de Chasteaux, les
_France_

Small, sheep cream cheeses from Lower Limousin.

Petits Fromages de Chèvre
_France_

Little cheeses from little goats grazing on the little mountains of
Provence.

Petits Pots de Caillé de Poitiers
_Poitou, France_

Clotted milk in small pots.

Pfister
_Cham, Switzerland_

Emmentaler type, although differing in its method of making with fresh
skim milk. It is named for Pfister Huber who was the first to
manufacture it, in Chain.

Philadelphia Cream
_U.S.A._

An excellent cream cheese that has been standard for seventy years.
Made in New York State in spite of its name.

Picnic
_U.S.A._

Handy-size picnic packing of mild American Cheddar. Swiss has long
been called picnic cheese in America, its home away from home.

Picodon de Dieule Fit
_Dauphiné, France_

In season from May to December.

Pie, Fromage à la
_France_

Another name for Fromage Blanc or Farm; soft, creamy cottage-cheese
type.

Pie Cheese
_U.S.A_

An apt American name for any round store cheese that can be cut in
wedges like a pie. Perfect with apple or mince or any other pie. And
by the way, in these days when natural cheese is getting harder to
find, any piece of American Cheddar cut in pie wedges before being
wrapped in cellophane is apt to be the real thing--if it has the rind
on. The wedge shape is used, however, _without any rind_, to make
processed pastes pass for "natural" even without that identifying
word, and with misleading labels such as old, sharp Cheddar and "aged
nine months." That's long enough to make a baby, but not a "natural"
out of a processed "Cheddar."

Pimiento
_U.S.A._

Because pimiento is the blandest of peppers, it just suits our bland
national taste, especially when mixed with Neufchâtel, cream, club or
cottage. The best is homemade, of course, with honest, snappy old
Cheddar mashed and mixed to taste, with the mild Spanish pepper that
equals the Spanish olive as a partner in such spreads.

Pimp _see_ Mainzer Hand Cheese.

Pineapple _see_ Chapter 4.

Piora
_Tessin, Switzerland_

Whole milk, either cow's or a mixture of goat's and cow's.

Pippen
_U.S.A._

Borden brand of Cheddar. Also Pippen Roll

Pithiviers au Foin
_France_

Orléans variety ripened on hay from October to May.

Poitiers
_France_

Goat's milker named from its Poitou district.

Pommel
_France_

All year. Double cream; unsalted.

Ponta Delgada
_Azores_

Semifirm; delicate; piquant

Pontgibaud
_France_

Similar to Roquefort Ripened at a very low temperature.

Pont l'Evêque

Characterized as a classic French _fromage_ "with Huge-like
Romanticism." (_See_ Chapter 3.) An imported brand is called "The
Inquisitive Cow."

Poona
_U.S.A._

Semisoft; mellow; New York Stater of distinctive flavor. Sold in
two-pound packs, to be kept four or five hours at room temperature
before serving.

Port-Salut, Port du Salut _see_ Chapter 3.

Port, Blue Links
_U.S.A._

"Blue" flavored with red port and put up in pseudo-sausage links.

Pot cheese
_U.S.A._

Cottage cheese with a dry curd, not creamed. An old English favorite
for fruited cheese cakes with perfumed plums, lemons, almonds and
macaroons. In Ireland it was used in connection with the
sheep-shearing ceremonies, although itself a common cow curd.
Pennsylvania pot cheese is cooked.

Potato
_Germany and U.S.A._

Made in Thuringia from sour cow milk with sheep or goat sometimes
added. "The potatoes are boiled and grated or mashed. One part of the
potato is thoroughly mixed or kneaded with two or three parts of die
curd. In the better cheese three parts of potatoes are mixed with two
of curd. During the mixing, salt and sometimes caraway seed are added.
The cheese is allowed to stand for from two to four days while a
fermentation takes place. After this the curd is sometimes covered
with beer or cream and is finally placed in tubs and allowed to ripen
for fourteen days. A variety of this cheese is made in the U.S. It is
probable, however, that it is not allowed to ripen for quite so long a
period as the potato cheese of Europe. In all other essentials it
appears to be the same."
From U.S. Department of Agriculture _Bulletin_ No. 608.

Potato Pepper
_Italy_

Italian Potato cheese is enlivened with black pepper, like Pepato,
only not so stony hard.

Pots de Crème St. Gervais
_St. Gervais-sur-mer, France_

The celebrated cream that rivals English Devonshire and is eaten both
as a sweet and as a fresh cheese.

Pouligny-St. Pierre
_Touraine, France_

A celebrated cylindrical cheese made in Indre. Season from May to
December.

Poustagnax, le
_France_

A fresh cow-milk cheese of Gascony.

Prato
_Brazil_

Semihard, very yellow imitation of the Argentine imitation of Holland
Dutch. Standard Brazilian dessert with guava or quince paste. Named
not from "dish" but the River Plate district of the Argentine from
whence it was borrowed long ago.

Prattigau
_Switzerland_

Aromatic and sharp, Limburger type, from skim milk. Named for its home
valley.

Prestost or Saaland Flarr
_Sweden_

Similar to Gouda, but unique--the curd being mixed with whiskey,
packed in a basket, salted and cellared, wrapped in a cloth changed
daily; and on the third day finally washed with whiskey.

Primavera, Spring
_Minas Geraes, Brazil_

Semihard white brand of Minas cheese high quality, with a spring-like
fragrance.

Primost
_Norway_

Soft; whey; unripened; light brown; mild flavor.

Primula
_Norway_

A blend of French Brie and Petit Gruyère, mild table cheese imitate in
Norway, sold in small packages. Danish Appetitost is similar, but with
caraway added.

Processed
_U.S.A._

From here around the world. Natural cheese melted and modified by
emulsification with a harmless agent and thus changed into a plastic
mass.

Promessi
_Italy_

Small soft-cream cheese.

Provatura
_Italy_

A water-buffalo variety. This type of milk makes a good beginning for
a fine cheese, no matter how it is made.

Providence
_France_

Port-Salut from the Trappist monastery at Briquebec.

Provole, Provolone, Provolocine, Provoloncinni, Provoletti, and
Provolino
_Italy_

All are types, shapes and sizes of Italy's most widely known and
appreciated cheese. It is almost as widely but badly imitated in the
U.S.A., where the final "e" and "i" are interchangeable.

Cured in string nets that stay on permanently to hang decoratively in
the home kitchen or dining room. Like straw Chianti bottles,
Provolones weigh from _bocconi_ (mouthful), about one pound, to two to
four pounds. There are three-to five-pound Provoletti, and upward with
huge Salamis and Giants. Small ones come ball, pear, apple, and all
sorts of decorative shapes, big ones become monumental sculptures that
are works of art to compare with butter and soap modeling.

P'teux, le, or Fromage Cuit
_Lorraine, France_

Cooked cheese worked with white wine instead of milk, and potted.

Puant Macere
_Flanders_

"The most candidly named cheese in existence." In season from November
to June.

Pultost or Knaost
_Norway_

Sour milk with some buttermilk, farm made in mountains.

Pusztador
_Hungary_

Semihard, Limburger-Romadur type. Full flavor, high scent.

Pyrenees, Fromage des
_France_

A fine mountain variety.


Q

Quartiolo
_Italy_

Term used to distinguish Parmesan-type cheese made between September
and November.

Quacheq
_Macedonia, Greece_

Sheep, eaten both fresh and ripened.

Quargel _see_ Olmützer.

Quartirolo
_Italy_

Soft, cow's milk.

Queijos--Cheeses of the Azores, Brazil and Portugal
_see_ under their local or regional names: Alemtejo, Azeitão, Cardiga,
Ilha, Prato and Serra da Estrella.

Queso Anejo
_Mexico_

White, dry, skim milk.

Queso de Bola
_Mexico_

Whole milk, similar to Edam.

Queso de Cavallo
_Venezuela_

Pear-shaped cheese.

Quesos Cheeses: Blanco, Cartera and Palma Metida _see_ Venezuela.

Queso de Cincho
_Venezuela_

Hard, round orange balls weighing four pounds and wrapped in palm leaves.

Queso de Crema
_Costa Rica_

Similar to soft Brick.

Queso de Hoja, Leaf Cheese
_Puerto Rico_

Named from its appearance when cut, like leaves piled on top of each other.

Queso de Mano
_Venezuela_

Aromatic, sharp, in four-ounce packages.

Queso del Fais, Queso de la Tierra
_Puerto Rico_

White; pressed; semisoft Consumed locally,

Queso de Prensa
_Puerto Rico_

The name means pressed cheese. It is eaten either fresh or after
ripening two or three months.

Queso de Puna
_Puerto Rico_

Like U.S. cottage or Dutch cheese, eaten fresh.

Queso de Tapara
_Venezuela_

Made in Carora, near Barqisimeto, called _tapara_ from the shape and
tough skin of that local gourd. "It is very good fresh, but by the
time it arrives in Carora it is often bad and dry." D.K.K. in _Bueno
Provecho._

Queso Fresco
_El Salvador_

Cottage-cheese type.

Queville _see_ Chapter 3.

Queyras _see_ Champoléon.


R

Rabaçal
_Coimbra, Portugal_

Semisoft; sheep or goat; thick, round, four to five inches in
diameter. Pleasantly oily, if made from sheep milk.

Rabbit Cheese
_U.S.A._

A playful name for Cheddar two to three years old.

Radener
_Germany_

Hard; skim, similar to Emmentaler; made in Mecklenburg. Sixteen by
four inches, weight 32 pounds.

Radolfzeller Cream
_Germany, Switzerland, Austria_

Similar to Münster.

Ragnit _see_ Tilsit.

Rahmkäse, Allgäuer
_German_

Cream.

Rainbow
_Mexico_

Mild; mellow.

Ramadoux
_Belgium_

Soft; sweet cream; formed in cubes. Similar to Hervé

Rammil or Rammel
_England_

André Simon calls this "the best cheese made in Dorsetshire." Also
called Rammilk, because made from whole or "raw milk." Practically
unobtainable today.

Rangiport
_France_

A good imitation of Port-Salut made in Seine-et-Oise.

Rarush Durmar
_Turkey_

Brittle; mellow; nutty.

Rächerkäse

The name for all smoked cheese in Germanic countries, where it is very
popular.

Raviggiolo
_Tuscany, Italy_

Ewe's milk. Uncooked; soft; sweet; creamy.

Rayon or Raper
_Switzerland_

A blind Emmentaler called Rayon is shipped young to Italy, where it is
hardened by aging and then sold as Raper, for grating and seasoning.

Reblochon or Roblochon
_Savoy_

Sheep; soft; whole milk; in season from October to June. Weight one to
two pounds. A cooked cheese imitated as Brizecon in the same section.

Récollet de Gérardmer
_Vosges, France_

A harvest variety similar to Géromé, made from October to April

Red
_Russia_

_see_ Livlander.

Red Balls
_Dutch_

_see_ Edam.

Reggiano _see_ Grana.

Regianito
_Argentine_

Italian Reggiano type with a name of its own, for it is not a mere
imitation in this land of rich milk and extra fine cheeses.

Reichkäse
_German_

Patriotically hailed as cheese of the empire, when Germany had one.

Reindeer
_Lapland, Iceland, Sweden, Norway_

In all far northern lands a type of Swiss is made from reindeer milk
It is lightly salted, very hard; and the Lapland production is
curiously formed, like a dumbbell with angular instead of round ends.

Relish cream cheese
_U.S.A._

Mixed with any piquant relish and eaten fresh.

Remoudon, or Fromage Piquant
_Belgium_

The two names combine in re-ground piquant cheese, and that's what it
is. The season is winter, from November to June.

Requeijão
_Portugal and Brazil_

Recooked.

Resurrection _see_ Welsh.

Rhubarbe
_France_

A type of Roquefort which, in spite of its name, is no relation to our
pie plant.

Riceys _see_ Champenois.

Ricotta Romano
_Italy_

Soft and fresh. The best is made from sheep buttermilk. Creamy,
piquant, with subtle fragrance. Eaten with sugar and cinnamon,
sometimes with a dusting of powdered coffee.

Ricotta
_Italy and U.S.A._

Fresh, moist, unsalted cottage cheese for sandwiches, salads, lasagne,
blintzes and many Italian dishes. It is also mixed with Marsala and
rum and relished for dessert Ricotta may be had in every Little Italy,
some of it very well made and, unfortunately, some of it a poor
substitute whey cheese.

Ricotta Salata

Hard; grayish white. Although its flavor is milk it is too hard and
too salty for eating as is, and is mostly used for grating.

Riesengebirge
_Bohemia_

Semisoft; goat or cow; delicate flavor, lightly smoked in Bohemia's
northern mountains.

Rinnen
_Germany_

This traditional Pomeranian sour-milk, caraway-seeded variety is named
from the wooden trough in which it is laid to drain.

Riola
_Normandy, France_

Soft; sheep or goat; sharp; resembles Mont d'Or but takes longer to
ripen, two to three months.

Robbiole
Robbiola
Robbiolini
_  Lombardy_
_  Italian_

Very similar to Crescenza (_see_.) Alpine winter cheese of fine
quality. The form is circular and flat, weighing from eight ounces to
two pounds, while Robbiolini, the baby of the family tips the scale at
just under four ounces.

Roblochon, le

Same as Reblochon. A delicious form of it is made of half-dried
sheep's milk in Le Grand Bornand.

Rocamadur
_Limousin, France_

Tiny sheep milk cheese weighing two ounces. In season November to May.

Rocroi
_France_

From the Champagne district.

Rokadur
_Yugoslavia_

Imitation Roquefort.

Roll
_England_

Hard cylinder, eight by nine inches, weighing twenty pounds.

Rollot or Rigolot
_Picardy and Montdidier, France_

Soft; fermented; mold-inoculated; resembles Brie and Camembert, but
much smaller. In season October to May. This is Picardy's one and only
cheese.

Roma
_Italy_

Soft cream.

Romadour, Romadura, and other national spellings
_Germany, Austria, Hungary, Switzerland_

A great Linburger. The eating season is from November to April. It is
not a summer cheese, especially in lands where refrigeration is
scarce. Fine brands are exported to America from several countries.

Romano, Romano Vacchino
_Italy_

Strong: flavoring cheese like Parmesan and Pecorino.

Romanello
_U.S.A._

Similar to Romano Vacchino and Old Monterey Jack. Small grating
cheese, cured one year.

Roquefort
_France_

King of cheeses, with its "tingling Rabelaisian pungency." _See_
Chapter 3.

Roquefort cheese dressing, bottled
_U.S.A._

Made with genuine imported Roquefort, but with cottonseed oil instead
of olive, plain instead of wine vinegar, sugar, salt, paprika,
mustard, flour and spice oil.

Roquefort de Corse
_Corsica, France_

This Corsican imitation is blue-colored and correctly made of sheep
milk, but lacks the chalk caves of Auvergne for ripening.

Roquefort de Tournemire
_France_

Another Blue cheese of sheep milk from Languedoc, using the royal
Roquefort name.

Rougerets, les
_Lyonnais, France_

A typical small goat cheese from Forez, in a section where practically
every variety is made with goat milk.

Rouennais
_France_

This specialty, named after its city, Rouen, is a winter cheese, eaten
from October to May.

Round Dutch
_Holland_

An early name for Edam.

Rouy, le
_Normandy, France_

From the greatest of the cheese provinces, Normandy.

Royal Brabant
_Belgium_

Whole milk. Small, Limburger type.

Royal Sentry
_Denmark_

Processed Swiss made in Denmark and shipped to Americans who haven't
yet learned that a European imitation can be as bad as an American
one. This particular pasteurized process-cheese spread puts its
ingredients in finer type than any accident insurance policy: Samsoe
(Danish Swiss) cheese, cream, water, non-fat dry milk solids, cheese
whey solids and disodium phosphate.

Ruffec, Fromage de
_Saintonge, France_

Fresh; goat.

Runesten
_Denmark and U.S.A._

Similar to Herrgårdsost. Small eyes. "Wheel" weighs about three
pounds. Wrapped in red transparent film.

Rush Cream Cheese
_England and France_

Not named from the rush in which many of our cheeses are made, but
from the rush mats and nets some fresh cream cheeses are wrapped and
sewed up in to ripen. According to an old English recipe the curds are
collected with an ordinary fish-slice and placed in a rush shape,
covered with a cloth when filled. Lay a half-pound weight in a saucer
and set this on top of the strained curd for a few hours, and then
increase the weight by about a half pound. Change the cloths daily
until the cheese looks mellow, then put into the rush shape with the
fish slice. The formula in use in France, where willow heart-shape
baskets are sold for making this cheese, is as follows: Add one cup
new warm milk to two cups freshly-skimmed cream. Dissolve in this one
teaspoon of fine sugar and one tablespoon common rennet or thirty
drops of Hauser's extract of rennet. Let it remain in a warm place
until curd sets. Rush and straw mats are easily made by cutting the
straw into lengths and stringing them with a needle and thread. The
mats or baskets should not be used a second time.


S

Saaland Pfarr, or Prestost
_Sweden_

Firm; sharp; biting; unique of its kind because it is made with
whiskey as an ingredient and the finished product is also washed with
whiskey.

Saanen
_Switzerland_

Semihard and as mellow as all good Swiss cheese. This is the finest
cheese in the greatest cheese land; an Emmentaler also known as
Hartkäse, Reibkäse and Walliskäse, it came to fame in the sixteenth
century and has always fetched an extra price for its quality and age.
It is cooked much dryer in the making, so it takes longer to ripen and
then keeps longer than any other. It weighs only ten to twenty pounds
and the eyes are small and scarce. The average period needed for
ripening is six years, but some take nine.

Sage, or Green cheese
_England_

This is more of a cream cheese, than a Cheddar, as Sage is in the
U.S.A. It is made by adding sage leaves and a greening to milk by the
method described in Chapter 4.

Saint-Affrique
_Guyenne, France_

This gourmetic center, hard by the celebrated town of Roquefort, lives
up to its reputation by turning out a toothsome goat cheese of local
renown.

We will not attempt to describe it further, since like most of the
host of cheeses honored with the names of Saints, it is seldom shipped
abroad.

Saint-Agathon
_Brittany, France_

Season, October to July.

Saint-Amand-Montrond
_Berry, France_

Made from goat's milk.

Saint-Benoit
_Loiret, France_

Soft Olivet type distinguished by charcoal being added to the salt
rubbed on the outside of the finished cheese. It ripens in twelve to
fifteen days in summer, and eighteen to twenty in winter. It is about
six inches in diameter.

Saint-Claude
_Franche-Comté, France_

Semihard; blue; goat; mellow; small; square; a quarter to a half
pound. The curd is kept five to six hours only before salting and is
then eaten fresh or put away to ripen.

Saint-Cyr _see_ Mont d'Or.

Saint-Didier au Mont d'Or _see_ Mont d'Or.

Saint-Florentin
_Burgundy, France_

A lusty cheese, soft but salty, in season from November to July.

Saint-Flour
_Auvergne, France_

Another seasonal specialty from this province of many cheeses.

Saint-Gelay
_Poitou, France_

Made from goat's milk.

Saint-Gervais, Pots de Creme, or Le Saint Gervais
_see_ Pots de Crème.

Saint-Heray _see_ La Mothe.

Saint-Honoré
_Nivernais, France_

A small goat cheese.

Saint-Hubert
_France_

Similar to Brie.

Saint-Ivel
_England_

Fresh dairy cream cheese containing _Lactobacillus acidophilus_.
Similar to the yogurt cheese of the U.S.A., which is made with
_Bacillus Bulgaricus._

Saint-Laurent
_Roussillon, France_

Mountain sheep cheese.

Saint-Lizier
_Béarn, France_

A white, curd cheese.

Saint-Loup, Fromage de
_Poitou and Vendée, France_

Half-goat, half-cow milk, in season February to September

Saint-Marcellin
_Dauphiné, France_

One of the very best of all goat cheeses. Three by 3/4 inches,
weighing a quarter of a pound. In season from March to December.
Sometimes sheep milk may be added, even cow's, but this is essentially
a goat cheese.

Saint-Moritz
_Switzerland_

Soft and tangy.

Saint-Nectaire, or Senecterre
_Auvergne, France_

Noted as one of the greatest of all French goat cheeses.

Saint-Olivet _see_ Chapter 3.

Saint-Pierre-Pouligny _see_ Pouligny-Saint-Pierre.

Saint-Reine _see_ Alise.

Saint-Rémy, Fromage de
_Haute-Saône, France_

Soft Pont l'Evêque type.

Saint-Stefano
_German_

Bel Paese type.

Saint-Winx
_Flanders, France_

The fromage of Saint-Winx is a traditional leader in this Belgian
border province noted for its strong, spiced dairy products.

Sainte-Anne d'Auray
_Brittany, France_

A notable Port-Salut made by Trappist monks.

Sainte-Marie
_Franche-Comté, France_

A creamy concoction worthy of its saintly name.

Sainte-Maure, le, or Fromage de Sainte-Maure-de-Touraine
_France_

Made in Touraine from May to November. Similar to Valençay.

Salamana
_Southern Europe_

Soft sheep's milk cheese stuffed into bladderlike sausage, to ripen.
It has authority and flavor when ready to spread on bread, or to mix
with cornmeal and cook into a highly cheese-flavored porridge.

Salame
_France_

Soft cream cheese stuffed into skins like salami sausages.
Salami-sausage style of packing cheese has always been common in
Italy, from Provolone down, and now--both as salami and links--it has
became extremely popular for processed and cheese foods throughout
America.

Salers, Bleu de
_France_

One of the very good French Blues.

Saligny
_Champagne, France_

White cheese made from sheep's milk.

Saloio
_Lisbon, Portugal_

An aromatic farm-made hand cheese of skim milk. Short cylinder, 1-1/2
to two inches in diameter, weighing a quarter of a pound. Made near
the capital, Lisbon, on many small farms.

Salonite
_Italy_

Favorite of Emperor Augustus a couple of thousand years ago.

Saltee
_Ireland_

Firm; highly colored; tangy; boxed in half-pound slabs. The same as
Whitethorn except for the added color. Whitethorn is as white as its
name implies.

Salt-free cheese, for diets

U.S. cottage; French fresh goat cheese; and Luxembourg Kochenkäse.

Samsö
_Denmark_

Hard; white; sharp; slightly powdery and sweetish. This is the pet
cheese of Erik Blegvad who illustrated this book.

Sandwich Nut

An American mixture of chopped nuts with Cream cheese or Neufchâtel.

Sapsago _see_ Chapter 3.

Sardegna
_Sardinia_

A Romano type made in Sardinia.

Sardinian
_Sardinia, Italy_

The typical hard grating cheese of this section of Italy.

Sardo
_Sardinia, Italy_

Hard; sharp; for table and for seasoning. Imitated in the Argentine.
There is also a Pecorino named Sardo.

Sarraz or Sarrazin
_Vaud, Switzerland_

Roquefort type.

Sassenage
_Dauphiny, France_

Semihard; bluer and stronger than Stilton. This makes a French trio of
Blues with Septmoncel and Gex, all three of which are made with the
three usual milks mixed: cow, goat and sheep. A succulent fermented
variety for which both Grenoble and Sassenage are celebrated.

Satz
_Germany_

Hard cheese made in Saxony.

Savoy, Savoie
_France_

Semisoft; mellow; tangy Port-Salut made by Trappist monks in Savoy.

Sbrinz
_Argentine_

Hard; dry; nutty; Parmesan grating type.

Scanno
_Abruzzi, Italy_

Soft as butter; sheep; burnt taste, delicious with fruits. Blackened
rind, deep yellow interior.

Scarmorze or Scamorze
_Italy_

Hard; buffalo milk; mild Provolone type. Also called Pear from being
made in that shape, oddly enough also in pairs, tied together to hang
from rafters on strings in ripening rooms or in the home kitchen. Fine
when sliced thick and fried in olive oil. A specialty around Naples.
Light-tan oiled rind, about 3-1/2 by five inches in size. Imitated in
Wisconsin and sold as Pear cheese.

Schabziger _see_ Chapter 3.

Schafkäse (Sheep Cheese)
_Germany_

Soft; part sheep milk; smooth and delightful.

Schamser, or Rheinwald
_Canton Graubiinden, Switzerland_

Large skim-milker eighteen by five inches, weighing forty to forty-six
pounds.

Schlickermilch

This might be translated "milk mud." It's another name for Bloder,
sour milk "waddle" cheese.

Schlesische Sauermilchkäse
_Silesia, Poland_

Hard; sour-milker; made like hand cheese. Laid on straw-covered
shelves, dried by a stove in winter and in open latticed sheds in
summer. When very dry and hard, it is put to ripen in a cellar three
to eight weeks and washed with warm water two or three times a week.

Schlesischer Weichquarg
_Silesia, Poland_

Soft, fresh skim, sour curd, broken up and cooked at 100° for a short
time. Lightly pressed in a cloth sack twenty-four hours, then kneaded
and shaped by hand, as all hand cheeses are. Sometimes sharply
flavored with onions or caraway. Eaten fresh, before the strong hand
cheese odor develops.

Schloss, Schlosskäse, or Bismarck
_German_

This Castle cheese, also named for Bismarck and probably a favorite of
his, together with Bismarck jelly doughnuts, is an aristocratic
Limburger that served as a model for Liederkranz.

Schmierkäse

German cottage cheese that becomes
smearcase in America.

Schnitzelbank Pot _see_ Liederkranz, Chapter 4.

Schönland
_German_

Imitation of Italian Bel Paese, also translated "beautiful land."

Schützenkäse
_Austria_

Romadur-type. Small rectangular blocks weighing less than four ounces
and wrapped in tin foil.

Shottengsied
_Alpine_

A whey cheese made and consumed locally in the Alps.

Schwarzenberger
_Hungary and Bohemia_

One part skim to two parts fresh milk. It takes two to three months to
ripen.

Schweizerkäse
_Switzerland_

German for Swiss cheese. (_See_ Emmentaler.)

Schweizerost Dansk, Danish Swiss Cheese
_Denmark_

A popular Danish imitation of Swiss Swiss cheese that is nothing
wonderful.

Select Brick _see_ Chapter 12.

Selles-sur Cher
_Berry, France_

A goat cheese, eaten from February to September.

Sénecterre
_Puy-de-Dôme, France_

Soft, whole-milk; cylindrical, weighing about 1-1/2 pounds.

Septmoncel
_France_

Semihard; skim; blue-veined; made of all three milks: cow, goat and
sheep. An excellent "Blue" ranked above Roquefort by some, and next to
Stilton. Also called Jura Bleu, and a member of the triple milk
triplets with Gex and Sassenage.

Serbian
_Serbia_

Made most primitively by dropping heated stones into a kettle of milk
over an open fire. After the rennet is added, the curd stands for an
hour and is separated from the whey by being lifted in a cheesecloth
and strained. It is finally put in a wooden vessel to ripen. First it
is salted, then covered each day with whey for eight days and finally
with fresh milk for six.

Syria also makes a cheese called Serbian from goat's milk. It is
semisoft.

Serbian Butter _see_ Kajmar.

Serra da Estrella, Queijo da (Cheese of the Star Mountain Range)
_Portugal_

The finest of several superb mountain-sheep cheeses in Portugal. Other
milk is sometimes added, but sheep is standard. The milk is coagulated
by an extract of thistle or cardoon flowers in two to six hours. It is
ripened in circular forms for several weeks and marketed in rounds
averaging five pounds, about ten by two inches. The soft paste inside
is pleasantly oily and delightfully acid.

Sharp-flavored cheese

U.S. aged Cheddars, including Monterey Jack; Italian Romano Fecorino,
Old Asiago, Gorgonzola, Incanestrato and Caciocavallo; Spanish de
Fontine; Aged Roumanian Kaskaval.

Shefford _see_ Chapter 2.

Silesian
_Poland and Germany_

White; mellow; caraway-seeded. Imitated in the U.S.A. (see Schlesischer.)

Sir cheeses

In Yugoslavia, Montenegro and adjacent lands Sir or Cyr means cheese.
Mostly this type is made of skimmed sheep milk and has small eyes or
holes, a sharp taste and resemblance to both American Brick and
Limburger. They are much fewer than the Saint cheeses in France.

Sir Iz Mjesine
_Dalmatia, Yugoslavia_

Primitively made by heating skim sheep milk in a bottle over an open
fire, coagulating it quickly with pig or calf rennet, breaking up the
curd with a wooden spoon and stirring it by hand over the fire.
Pressed into forms eight inches square and two inches thick, it is
dried for a day and either eaten fresh or cut into cubes, salted,
packed in green sheep or goat hides, and put away to ripen.

Sir Mastny
_Montenegro_

Fresh sheep milk.

Sir Posny
_Montenegro_

Hard; skim sheep milk; white, with many small holes. Also answers to
the names of Tord and Mrsav.

Sir, Twdr _see_ Twdr Sir.

Sir, Warshawski _see_ Warshawski Syr.

Siraz
_Serbia_

Semisoft; whole milk. Mellow.

Skyr
_Iceland_

The one standard cheese of the country. A cross between Devonshire
cream and cream cheese, eaten with sugar and cream. It is very well
liked and filling, so people are apt to take too much. A writer on the
subject gives this bit of useful information for travelers: "It is not
advisable, however, to take coffee and Skyr together just before
riding, as it gives you diarrhea."

Slipcote, or Colwick
_England_

Soft; unripened; small; white; rich as butter. The curd is put in
forms six by two inches for the whey to drain away. When firm it is
placed between cabbage leaves to ripen for a week or two, and when it
is taken from the leaves the skin or coat becomes loose and easily
slips off--hence the name. In the middle of the eighteenth century it
was considered the best cream cheese in England and was made then, as
today, in Wissenden, Rutlandshire.

Smältost
_Sweden_

Soft and melting.

Smearcase

Old English corruption of German Schmierkäse, long used in America for
cottage cheese.

Smoked Block
_Austria_

A well-smoked cheese in block form.

Smoked Mozzarella _see_ Mozzarella Affumicata.

Smoked Szekely
_Hungary_

Soft; sheep; packed like sausage in skins or bladders and smoked.

Smokelet
_Norway_.

A small smoked cheese.

Soaked-curd cheese _see_ Washed-curd cheese.

Sorbais
_Champagne, France_

Semihard; whole milk; fermented; yellow, with reddish brown rind. Full
flavor, high smell. Similar to Maroilles in taste and square shape,
but smaller.

Sorte Maggenga and Sorte Vermenga

Two "sorts" of Italian Parmesan.

Soumaintrain, Fromage de
_France_

Soft; fine; strong variety from Upper Burgundy.

Soybean
_China_

Because this cheese is made of vegetable milk and often developed with
a vegetable rennet, it is rated by many as a regular cheese. But our
occidental kind with animal milk and rennet is never eaten by Chinese
and the mere mention of it has been known to make them shiver.

Spalen or Stringer
_Switzerland_

A small Emmentaler of fine reputation made in the Canton of
Unterwalden from whole and partly skimmed milk and named from the
vessel in which five or six are packed and transported together.

Sperrkäse _see_ Dry.

Spiced
_International_

Many a bland cheese is saved from oblivion by the addition of spice,
to give it zest. One or more spices are added in the making and
thoroughly mixed with the finished product, so the cheese often takes
the name of the spice: Kuminost or Kommenost for cumin; Caraway in
English and several other languages, among them Kümmel, Nokkelost and
Leyden; Friesan Clove and Nagelkass; Sage; Thyme, cloverleaf Sapsago;
whole black pepper Pepato, etc.

Spiced and Spiced Spreads
_U.S.A._

Government standards for spiced cheeses and spreads specify not less
than 1-1/2 ounces of spice to 100 pounds of cheese.

Spiced Fondue _see_ Vacherin Fondu.
_France_

Spitz Spitzkase
_Germany_

Small cylinder, four by one and a half inches. Caraway spiced,
Limburger-like. _see_ Backsteiner.

Sposi
_Italy_

Soft; small; cream.

Spra
_Greek_

Sharp and pleasantly salty, packed fresh from the brine bath in
one-pound jars. As tasty as all Greek cheeses because they are made
principally from sheep milk.

Stängenkase
_Germany_

Limburger type.

Stein Käse
_U.S.A._

Aromatic, piquant "stone." A beer stein accompaniment well made after
the old German original.

Steinbuscher-Käse
_German_

Semihard; firm; full cream; mildly sour and pungent. Brick forms,
reddish and buttery. Originated in Frankfurt. Highly thought of at
home but little known abroad.

Steppe
_Russia, Germany, Austria, Denmark_

German colonists made and named this in Russia. Rich and mellow, it
tastes like Tilsiter and is now made in Denmark for export, as well as
in Germany and Austria for home consumption.

Stilton _see_ Chapter 3.

Stirred curd cheese
_U.S.A._

Similar to Cheddar, but more granular, softer in texture and marketed
younger.

Stracchino
_Italy_

Soft; goat; fresh cream; winter; light yellow; very sharp, rich and
pungent. Made in many parts of Italy and eaten sliced, never grated. A
fine cheese of which Taleggio is the leading variety. See in Chapter
3. Also see Certoso Stracchino.

Stracchino Crescenza is an extremely soft and highly colored member of
this distinguished family.

Stravecchio
_Italy_

Well-aged, according to the name.
Creamy and mellow.

Stringer _see_ Spalen.

Styria
_Austria_

Whole milk. Cylindrical form.

Suffolk
_England_

An old-timer, seldom seen today. Stony-hard, horny "flet milk"
cartwheels locally nicknamed "bang." Never popular anywhere, it has
stood more abuse than Limburger, not for its smell but for its flinty
hardness.

    "Hunger will break through stone walls and anything
     except a Suffolk cheese."

    "Those that made me were uncivil
    For they made me harder than the devil.
    Knives won't cut me; fire won't sweat me;
    Dogs bark at me, but can't eat me."

Surati, Panir
_India_

Buffalo milk. Uncolored.

Suraz
_Serbia_

Semihard and semisoft.

Sveciaost
_Sweden_

A national pride, named for its country, Swedish cheese, to match
Swiss cheese and Dutch cheese. It comes in three qualities: full
cream, 3/4 cream, and half cream. Soft; rich; ready to eat at six
weeks and won't keep past six months. A whole-hearted, whole-milk,
wholesome cheese named after the country rather than a part of it as
most _osts_ are.

Sweet-curd
_U.S.A._

Hard Cheddar, differing in that the milk is set sweet and the curd
cooked firmer and faster, salted and pressed at once. When ripe,
however, it is hardly distinguishable from the usual Cheddar made by
the granular process.

Swiss
_U.S.A._

In 1845 emigrants from Galrus, Switzerland, founded New Galrus,
Wisconsin and, after failing at farming due to cinch bugs gobbling
their crops, they turned to cheesemaking and have been at it ever
since. American Swiss, known long ago as picnic cheese, has been their
standby, and only in recent years these Wisconsin Schweizers have had
competition from Ohio and other states who turn out the typical
cartwheels, which still look like the genuine imported Emmentaler.

Szekely
_Transylvania, Hungary_

Soft; sheep; packed in links of bladders and sometimes smoked. This is
the type of foreign cheese that set the popular style for American
processed links, with wine flavors and everything.


T

Taffel, Table, Taffelost
_Denmark_

A Danish brand name for an ordinary
slicing cheese.

Tafi
_Argentina_

Made in the rich province of Tucuman.

Taiviers, les Petits Fromages de
_Périgord, France_

Very small and tasty goat cheese.

Taleggio
_Lombardy, Italy_

Soft, whole-milk, Stracchino type.

Tallance
_France_

Goat.

Tamie
_France_

Port-Salut made by Trappist monks at Savoy from their method that is
more or less a trade secret. Tome de Beaumont is an imitation produced
not far away.

Tanzenberger
_Carinthia, Austria_

Limburger type.

Tao-foo or Tofu
_China, Japan, the Orient_

Soybean curd or cheese made from the "milk" of soybeans. The beans are
ground and steeped, made into a paste that's boiled so the starch
dissolves with the casein. After being strained off, the "milk" is
coagulated with a solution of gypsum. This is then handled in the
same way as animal milk in making ordinary cow-milk cheeses. After
being salted and pressed in molds it is ready to be warmed up and
added to soups and cooked dishes, as well as being eaten as is.

Teleme
_Rumania_

Similar to Brinza and sometimes called Branza de Bralia. Made of
sheep's milk and rapidly ripened, so it is ready to eat in ten days.

Terzolo
_Italy_

Term used to designate Parmesan-type cheese made in winter.

Tête à Tête, Tête de Maure, Moor's Head
_France_

Round in shape. French name for Dutch Edam.

Tête de Moine, Monk's Head
_France_

A soft "head" weighing ten to twenty pounds. Creamy, tasty, summer
Swiss, imitated in Jura, France, and also called Bellelay.

Tête de Mort _see_ Fromage Gras for this death's head.

"The Tempting cheese of Fyvie"
_Scotland_

Something on the order of Eve's apple, according to the Scottish rhyme
that exposes it:

    The first love token ye gae me
    Was the tempting cheese of Fyvie.
    O wae be to the tempting cheese,
    The tempting cheese of Fyvie,
    Gat me forsake my ain gude man
    And follow a fottman laddie.

Texel

Sheep's milk cheese of three or four pounds made on the island of
Texel, off the coast of the Netherlands.

Thenay
_Vendôme, France_

Resembles Camembert and Vendôme.

Thion
_Switzerland_

A fine Emmentaler.

Three Counties
_Ireland_

An undistinguished Cheddar named for the three counties that make most
of the Irish cheese.

Thuringia Caraway
_Germany_

A hand cheese spiked with caraway.

Thyme
_Syria_

Soft and mellow, with the contrasting pungence of thyme. Two other
herbal cheeses are flavored with thyme--both French: Fromage Fort II,
Hazebrook II.

Tibet
_Tibet_

The small, hard, grating cheeses named after the country Tibet, are of
sheep's milk, in cubes about two inches on all sides, with holes to
string them through the middle, fifty to a hundred on each string.
They suggest Chinese strings of cash and doubtless served as currency,
in the same way as Chinese cheese money. (_See under_ Money.)

Tignard
_Savoy, France_

Hard; sheep or goat; blue-veined; sharp; tangy; from Tigne Valley in
Savoy. Similar to Gex, Sassenage and Septmoncel.

Tijuana
_Mexico_

Hard; sharp; biting; named from the border race-track town.

Tillamook _see_ Chapter 4.

Tilsit, or Tilsiter Käse, also called Ragnit
_Germany_

This classical variety of East Prussia is similar to American Brick.
Made of whole milk, with many small holes that give it an open
texture, as in Port-Salut, which it also resembles, although it is
stronger and coarser.

Old Tilsiter is something special in aromatic tang, and attempts to
imitate it are made around the world. One of them, Ovár, is such a
good copy it is called Hungarian Tilsit. There are American, Danish,
and Canadian--even Swiss--imitations.

The genuine Tilsit has been well described as "forthright in flavor; a
good snack cheese, but not suitable for elegant post-prandial
dallying."

Tilziski
_Yugoslavia_

A Montenegrin imitation Tilsiter.

Tome de Beaumont
_France_

Whole cow's milk.

Tome, la
_Auvergne, France_

Also called Fourme, Cantal, or Fromage de Cantal. A kind of Cheddar
that comes from Ambert, Aubrac, Aurillac, Grand-Murol, Rôche, Salers,
etc.

Tome de Chèvre
_Savoy, France_

Soft goat cheese.

Tome de Savoie
_France_

Soft paste; goat or cow. Others in the same category are: Tome des
Beagues, Tome au Fenouil, Tome Doudane.

Tomelitan Gruyère
_Norway_

Imitation of French Gruyère in 2-1/2 ounce packages.

Topf or Topfkäse
_Germany_

A cooked cheese to which Pennsylvania pot is similar. Sour skim milk
cheese, eaten fresh and sold in packages of one ounce. When cured it
is flaky.

Toscano, or Pecorino Toscano
_Tuscany, Italy_

Sheep's milk cheese like Romano but softer, and therefore used as a
table cheese.

Toscanello
_Tuscany, Italy_

A smaller edition of Toscano.

Touareg
_Berber, Africa_

Skim milk often curdled with Korourou leaves. The soft curd is then
dipped out onto mats like pancake batter and sun dried for ten days or
placed by a fire for six, with frequent turning. Very hard and dry and
never salted. Made from Lake Tchad to the Barbary States by Berber
tribes.

Tour Eiffel
_Berry, France_

Besides naming this Berry cheese, Tour Eiffel serves as a picturesque
label and trademark for a brand of Camembert.

Touloumisio
_Greece_

Similar to Feta.

Tournette
_France_

Small goat cheese.

Tourne de chèvre
_Dauphiné, France_

Goat cheese.

Trappe, la, or Oka
_Canada_

Truly fine Port-Salut named for the Trappist order and its Canadian
monastery.

Trappist _see_ Chapter 3.

Trappist
_Yugoslavia_

Trappist Port-Salut imitation.

Trauben (Grape)
_Switzerland_

Swiss or Gruyère aged in Swiss Neuchâtel wine and so named for the
grape.

Travnik, Travnicki
_Albania, Russia, Yugoslavia_

Soft, sheep whole milk with a little goat sometimes and occasionally
skim milk. More than a century of success in Europe, Turkey and
adjacent lands where it is also known as Arnauten, Arnautski Sir and
Vlasic.

When fresh it is almost white and has a mild, pleasing taste. It
ripens to a stronger flavor in from two weeks to several months, and
is not so good if holes should develop in it. The pure sheep-milk type
when aged is characteristically oily and sharp.

Traz os Montes
_Portugal_

Soft; sheep; oily; rich; sapid. For city turophiles nostalgically
named "From the Mountains." All sheep cheese is oily, some of it a bit
muttony, but none of it at all tallowy.

Trecce
_Italy_

Small, braided cheese, eaten fresh.

Triple Aurore
_France_

Normandy cheese in season all the year around.

Troo
_France_

Made and consumed in Touraine from May to January.

Trouville
_France_

Soft, fresh, whole milk. Pont l'Evêque type of superior quality.

Troyes, Fromage de _see_ Barberey and Ervy.

Truckles
_England_

No. I: Wiltshire, England. Skimmed milk; blue-veined variety like Blue
Vinny. The quaint word is the same as used in truckle or trundle bed.
On Shrove Monday Wiltshire kids went from door to door singing for a
handout:

    Pray, dame, something,
    An apple or a dumpling,
    Or a piece of Truckle cheese
    Of your own making.

No. II: Local name in the West of England for a full cream Cheddar
put up in loaves.

Tschil
_Armenia_

Also known as Leaf, Telpanir and Zwirn. Skim milk of either sheep or
cows. Made into cakes and packed in skins in a land where wine is
drunk from skin canteens, often with Tschil.

Tuile de Flandre
_France_

A type of Marolles.

Tullum Penney
_Turkey_

Salty from being soaked in brine.

Tuna, Prickly Pear
_Mexico_

Not an animal milk cheese, but a vegetable one, made by boiling and
straining the pulp of the cactuslike prickly pear fruit to cheeselike
consistency. It is chocolate-color and sharp, piquantly pleasant when
hard and dry. It is sometimes enriched with nuts, spices and/or
flowers. It will keep for a very long time and has been a dessert or
confection in Mexico for centuries.

Tuscano
_Italy_

Semihard; cream color; a sort of Tuscany Parmesan.

Twdr Sir
_Serbia_

Semisoft sheep skim-milk cheese with small holes and a sharp taste.
Pressed in forms two by ten to twelve inches in diameter. Similar to
Brick or Limburger.

Twin Cheese
_U.S.A._

Outstanding American Cheddar marketed by Joannes Brothers, Green Bay,
Wisconsin.

Tworog
_Russia_

Semihard sour milk farm (not factory) made. It is used in the cheese
bread called Notruschki.

Tybo
_Denmark_

Made in Copenhagen from pasteurized skim milk.

Tyrol Sour
_German_

A typical Tyrolean hand cheese.

Tzgone
_Dalmatia_

The opposite number of Tzigen, just below.

Tzigenkäse
_Austria_

Semisoft; skimmed sheep, goat or cow milk. White; sharp and salty;
originated in Dalmatia.


U

Urda
_Rumania_

Creamy; sweet; mild.

Uri
_Switzerland_

Hard; brittle; white; tangy. Made in the Canton of Uri. Eight by eight
to twelve inches, weight twenty to forty pounds.

Urseren
_Switzerland_

Mild flavored. Cooked curd.

Urt, Fromage d'

Soft Port-Salut type of the Basque country.


V

Vacherin
_France and Switzerland_

I. Vacherin à la Main. Savoy, France. Firm, leathery rind, soft
interior like Brie or Camembert; round, five to six by twelve inches
in diameter. Made in summer to eat in winter. When fully ripe it is
almost a cold version of the great dish called Fondue. Inside the
hard-rind container is a velvety, spicy, aromatic cream, more runny
than Brie, so it can be eaten with a spoon, dunked in, or spread on
bread. The local name is Tome de Montague.

II. Vacherin Fondu, or Spiced Fondu. Switzerland. Although called
Fondu from being melted, the No. I Vacherin comes much closer to our
conception of the dish Fondue, which we spell with an "e."

Vacherin No. II might be called a re-cooked and spiced Emmentaler, for
the original cheese is made, and ripened about the same as the Swiss
classic and is afterward melted, spiced and reformed into Vacherin.

Val-d'Andorre, Fromage du
_Andorra, France_

Sheep milk.

Valdeblore, le
_Nice, France_

Hard, dried, small Alpine goat cheese.

Valençay, or Fromage de Valençay
_Touraine, France_

Soft; cream; goat milk; similar to Saint-Maure. In season from May to
December. This was a favorite with Francis I.

Valio
_Finland_

One-ounce wedges, six to a box, labeled pasteurized process Swiss
cheese, made by the Cooperative Butter Export Association, Helsinki,
Finland, to sell to North Americans to help them forget what real
cheese is.

Valsic
_Albania_

Crumbly and sharp.

Varalpenland
_Germany_

Alpine. Piquant, strong in flavor and
smell.

Varennes, Fromage de
_France_

Soft, fine, strong variety from Upper Burgundy.

Västerbottenost
_West Bothnia_

Slow-maturing. One to one-and-a-half years in ripening to a pungent,
almost bitter taste.

Västgötaost
_West Gothland, Sweden_

Semihard; sweet and nutty. Takes a half year to mature. Weight twenty
to thirty pounds.

Vendôme, Fromage de
_France_

Hard; sheep; round and flat; like la Cendrée in being ripened under
ashes. There is also a soft Vendôme sold mostly in Paris.

Veneto, Venezza
_Italy_

Parmesan type, similar to Asiago. Usually sharp.

Vic-en-Bigorre
_France_

Winter cheese of Béarn in season October to May.

Victoria
_England_

The brand name of a cream cheese made in Guilford.

Ville Saint-Jacques
_France_

Ile-de-France winter specialty in season from November to May.

Villiers
_France_

Soft, one-pound squares made in Haute-Marne.

Viry-vory, or Vary
_France_

Fresh cream cheese.

Viterbo
_Italy_

Sheep milk usually curdled with wild artichoke, _Cynara Scolymus_.
Strong grating and seasoning type of the Parmesan-Romano-Pecorino
family.

Vize
_Greece_

Ewe's milk; suitable for grating.

Void
_Meuse, France_

Soft associate of Pont l'Evêque and Limburger.

Volvet Kaas
_Holland_

The name means "full cream" cheese and that--according to law--has 45%
fat in the dry product (_See_ Gras.)

Vorarlberg Sour-milk
_Greasy_

Hard; greasy; semicircular form of different sizes, with extra-strong
flavor and odor. The name indicates that it is made of sour milk.

Vory, le
_France_

Fresh cream variety like Neufchâtel and Petit Suisse.


W

Warshawski Syr
_Poland_

Semihard; fine nutty flavor; named for the capital city of Poland.

Warwickshire
_England_

Derbyshire type.

Washed-curd cheese
_U.S.A._

Similar to Cheddar. The curd is washed to remove acidity and any
abnormal flavors.

Wedesslborg
_Denmark_

A mild, full cream loaf of Danish blue that can be very good if fully
ripened.

Weisschmiere
_Bavaria, Germany_

Similar to Weisslacker, a slow-ripening variety that takes four
months.

Weisslacker, White Lacquer
_Bavaria_

Soft; piquant; semisharp; Allgäuer-type put up in cylinders and
rectangles, 4-1/2 by 4 by 3-1/2, weighing 2-1/2 pounds. One of
Germany's finest soft cheeses.

Welsh cheeses

The words Welsh and cheese have become synonyms down the ages. Welsh
"cheeses can be attractive: the pale, mild Caerphilly was famous at
one time, and nowadays has usually a factory flavor. A soft cream
cheese can be obtained at some farms, and sometimes holds the same
delicate melting sensuousness that is found in the poems of John
Keats.

"The 'Resurrection Cheese' of Llanfihangel Abercowyn is no longer
available, at least under that name. This cheese was so called because
it was pressed by gravestones taken from an old church that had fallen
into ruins. Often enough the cheeses would be inscribed with such
wording as 'Here lies Blodwen Evans, aged 72.'" (From _My Wales_ by
Rhys Davies.)

Wensleydale
_England_

 I. England, Yorkshire. Hard; blue-veined; double cream; similar to
Stilton. This production of the medieval town of Wensleydale in the
Ure Valley is also called Yorkshire-Stilton and is in season from June
to September. It is put up in the same cylindrical form as Stilton,
but smaller. The rind is corrugated from the way the wrapping is put
on.

II. White; flat-shaped; eaten fresh; made mostly from January through
the Spring, skipping the season when the greater No. I is made
(throughout the summer) and beginning to be made again in the fall and
winter.

Werder, Elbinger and Niederungskäse
_West Prussia_

Semisoft cow's-milker, mildly acid, shaped like Gouda.

West Friesian
_Netherlands_

Skim-milk cheese eaten when only a week old. The honored antiquity of
it is preserved in the anonymous English couplet:

    Good bread, good butter and good cheese
    Is good English and good Friese.

Westphalia Sour Milk, or Brioler
_Germany_

Sour-milk hand cheese, kneaded by hand. Butter and/or egg yolk is
mixed in with salt, and either pepper or caraway seeds. Then the
richly colored curd is shaped by hand into small balls or rolls of
about one pound. It is dried for a couple of hours before being put
down cellar to ripen. The peculiar flavor is due partly to the
seasonings and partly to the curd being allowed to putrify a little,
like Limburger, before pressing.

This sour-milker is as celebrated as Westphalian raw ham. It is so
soft and fat it makes a sumptuous spread, similar to Tilsit and
Brinza. It was named Brioler from the "Gute Brioler" inn where it was
perfected by the owner, Frau Westphal, well over a century ago.

The English sometimes miscall it Bristol from a Hobson-Jobson of the
name Briol.

Whale Cheese
_U.S.A._

In _The Cheddar Box, _Dean Collins tells of an ancient legend in which
the whales came into Tillamook Bay to be milked; and he poses the
possible origin of some waxy fossilized deposits along the shore as
petrified whale-milk cheese made by the aboriginal Indians after
milking the whales.

White, Fromage Blanc
_France_

Skim-milk summer cheese made in many parts of the country and eaten
fresh, with or without salt.

White Cheddar
_U.S.A._

Any Cheddar that isn't colored with anatto is known as White Cheddar.
Green Bay brand is a fine example of it.

White Gorgonzola

This type without the distinguishing blue veins is little known
outside of Italy where it is highly esteemed. (_See_ Gorgonzola.)

White Stilton
_England_

This white form of England's royal blue cheese lacks the aristocratic
veins that are really as green as Ireland's flag.

Whitethorn
_Ireland_

Firm; white; tangy; half-pound slabs boxed. Saltee is the same, except
that it is colored.

Wilstermarsch-Käse Holsteiner Marsch
_Schleswig-Holstein, Germany_

Semihard; full cream; rapidly cured; Tilsit type; very fine; made at
Itzehoe.

Wiltshire or Wilts
_England_

A Derbyshire type of sharp Cheddar popular in Wiltshire. (_See_ North
Wilts.)

Wisconsin Factory Cheeses
_U.S.A._

Have the date of manufacture stamped on the rind, indicating by the
age whether the flavor is "mild, mellow, nippy, or sharp." American
Cheddar requires from eight months to a year to ripen properly, but
most of it is sold green when far too young.

Notable Wisconsiners are Loaf, Limburger, Redskin and Swiss.

Withania
_India_

Cow taboos affect the cheesemaking in India, and in place of rennet
from calves a vegetable rennet is made from withania berries. This
names a cheese of agreeable flavor when ripened, but, unfortunately,
it becomes acrid with age.


Y

Yoghurt, or Yogurt
_U.S.A._

Made with _Bacillus bulgaricus_, that develops the acidity of the
milk. It is similar to the English Saint Ivel.

York, York Curd and Cambridge York
_England_

A high-grade cream cheese similar to Slipcote, both of which are
becoming almost extinct since World War II. Also, this type is too
rich to keep any length of time and is sold on the straw mat on which
it is cured, for local consumption.

Yorkshire-Stilton
_Cotherstone, England_

This Stilton, made chiefly at Cotherstone, develops with age a fine
internal fat which makes it so extra-juicy that it's a general
favorite with English epicures who like their game well hung.

York State
_U.S.A._

Short for New York State, the most venerable of our Cheddars.

Young America
_U.S.A._

A mild, young, yellow Cheddar.

Yo-yo
_U.S.A._

Copying pear-and apple-shaped balls of Italian Provolone hanging on
strings, a New York cheesemonger put out a Cheddar on a string, shaped
like a yo-yo.


Z

Ziegel
_Austria_

Whole milk, or whole milk with cream added. Aged only two months.

Ziegenkäse
_Germany_

A general name in Germanic lands for cheeses made of goat's milk.
Altenburger is a leader among Ziegenkäse.

Ziger

 I. This whey product is not a true cheese, but a cheap form of food
made in all countries of central Europe and called albumin cheese,
Recuit, Ricotta, Broccio, Brocotte, Serac, Ceracee, etc. Some are
flavored with cider and others with vinegar. There is also a whey
bread.

II. Similar to Corsican Broccio and made of sour sheep milk instead of
whey. Sometimes mixed with sugar into small cakes.

Zips _see_ Brinza.

Zomma
_Turkey_

Similar to Caciocavallo.

Zwirn _see_ Tschil.




[Illustration]

Index of Recipes

American Cheese Salad, 128
Angelic Camembert, 120
Apple and Cheese Salad, 130
Apple Pie à la Cheese, 119
Apple Pie Adorned, 119
Apple Pie, Cheese-crusty, 119
Asparagus and Cheese, Italian, 110
au Gratin
  Eggs, 125
  Potatoes, 125
  Tomatoes, 125

Blintzes, 111
Brie or Camembert Salad, 128

Camembert, Angelic, 120
Champagned Roquefort or Gorgonzola, 122
Cheddar Omelet, 135
Cheese and Nut Salad, 128
Cheese and Pea Salad, 130
Cheese Cake, Pineapple, 117
Cheese Charlotte, 133
Cheese-crusty Apple Pie, 119
Cheese Custard, 118
Cheese Pie, Open-faced, 118
Cheese Sauce, Plain, 131
Cheese Waffles, 112
Cheesed Mashed Potatoes, 137
Chicken Cheese Soup, 127
Cottage Cheese Pancakes, 112
Christmas Cake Sandwiches, 120
Cold Dunking, 133
Custard, Cheese, 118

Dauphiny Ravioli, 109
Diablotins, 135
Dumpling, Napkin, 112
Dunking, Cold, 133

Eggs au Gratin, 125

Flan au Fromage, 119
Fondue
  à l'Italienne, 84
  All-American, 85
  au Fromage, 90
  Baked Tomato, 89
  Brick, 92
  Catsup Tummy Fondiddy, Quickie, 91
  Cheddar Dunk Bowl, 93
  Cheese, 92
  Cheese, and Corn, 92
  Cheese and Rice, 91
  Chives, 88
  Comtois, 88
  Corn and Cheese, 92
  Neufchâtel Style, 82
  100% American, 90
  Parmesan, 86
  Quickie Catsup Tummy Fondiddy, 91
  Rice, and Cheese, 91
  Sapsago Swiss, 86
  Tomato, 89
  Tomato Baked, 89
  Vacherin-Fribourg, 88
Fritters, Italian, 109
Fritto Misto, Italian, 137

Garlic on Cheese, 110
Gorgonzola and Banana Salad, 129
Green Cheese Salad Julienne, 127

Italian Asparagus and Cheese, 110
Italian Fritters, 109
Italian Fritto Misto, 137
Italian-Swiss Scallopini, 108

Little Hats, Cappelletti, 108

Meal-in-One Omelet, A, 135
Miniature Pizzas, 107

Napkin Dumpling, 112
Neapolitan Baked Lasagne, 108

Omelet
  Cheddar, 135
  Meal-in-One, 135
  Parmesan, 135
  Tomato, 136
  with Cheese Sauce, 136
Onion Soup, 126
Onion Soup au Gratin, 126
Open-faced Cheese Pie, 118

Pancakes, Cottage Cheese, 112
Parmesan Omelet, 135
Parsleyed Cheese Sauce, 131
Pfeffernüsse and Caraway, 134
Pineapple Cheese Cake, 117
Piroghs, Polish, 137
Pizza, 106
  Cheese, 107
  Dough, 106
  Miniature, 107
  Tomato Paste, 107
Polish Piroghs, 137
Potatoes au Gratin, 125
Potatoes, Mashed, Cheesed, 137
Puffs
  Breakfast, 100
  Cheese, New England, 100
  Cream Cheese, 100
  Danish Fondue, 100
  Fried, 99
  New England Cheese, 100
  Parmesan, 99
  Roquefort, 99
  Three-in-One, 98

Rabbit
  After-Dinner, 55
  All-American Succotash, 77
  American Woodchuck, 63
  Anchovy, 70
  Asparagus, 68
  Basic
    No. 1 (with beer), 49
    No. 2 (with milk), 50
  Blushing Bunny, 63
  Border-hopping Bunny, 60
  "Bouquet of the Sea," 69
  Buttermilk, 76
  Celery and Onion, 67
  Chipped Beef, 66
  Cream Cheese, 75
  Crumby, 70
  Crumby Tomato, 71
  Curry, 76
  Danish, 77
  Devil's Own, The, 65
  Dr. Maginn's, 54
  Dried Beef, 66
  Dutch, 72
  Easy English, 78
  Eggnog, 77
  Fish, Fresh or Dried, 69
  Fluffy, Eggy, 64
  Frijole, 60
  Gherkin, 71
  Ginger Ale, 76
  Golden Buck, 59
  Golden Buck II, 59
  Grilled Sardine, 69
  Grilled Tomato, 65
  Grilled Tomato and Onion, 65
  Gruyère, 73
  Kansas Jack, 66
  Lady Llanover's Toasted, 52
  Latin-American Corn, 67
  Mexican Chilaly, 64
  Mushroom-Tomato, 67
  Onion Rum Tum Tiddy, 62
  Original Recipe, Ye, 57
  Oven, 58
  Oyster, 68
  Pink Poodle, 74
  Pumpernickel, 72
  Reducing, 75
  Roe, 69
  Rum Tum Tiddy, 61
  Rum Tum Tiddy, Onion, 62
  Rum Tum Tiddy, Sherry, 62
  Running, 63
  Sardine, Grilled, 69
  Sardine, Plain, 69
  Savory Eggy Dry, 75
  Scotch Woodcock, 63
  Sea-food, 68
  Sherry, 73
  Sherry Rum Tum Tiddy, 62
  Smoked Cheddar, 70
  Smoked fish, 70
  South African Tomato, 61
  Spanish Sherry, 74
  Stieff Recipe, The, 51
  Swiss Cheese, 73
  Tomato, 61
  Tomato and Onion, Grilled, 65
  Tomato, Crumby, 71
  Tomato, Grilled, 65
  Tomato Soup, 62
  Tomato, South American, 61
  Venerable Yorkshire Buck, The, 59
  Yale College, 59
  Yorkshire, 58
Ramekins
  à la Parisienne, 103
  Casserole, 105
  Cheese I, 101
  Cheese II, 102
  Cheese III, 102
  Cheese IV, 103
  Frying Pan, 105
  Morézien, 104
  Puff Paste, 105
  Roquefort-Swiss, 104
  Swiss-Roquefort, 104
Ravioli, Dauphiny, 109
Roquefort, Champagned, 122
Roquefort Cheese Salad Dressing, 130
Rosie's Swiss Breakfast Cheese Salad, 129

Salad
  American Cheese, 128
  Apple and Cheese, 130
  Brie, 128
  Camembert, 128
  Cheese and Nut, 128
  Cheese and Pea, 130
  Gorgonzola and Banana, 129
  Green Cheese Salad Julienne, 127
  Rosie's Swiss Breakfast Cheese, 129
  Swiss Cheese, 129
  Three-in-One Mold, 128
Sandwiches
  Alpine Club, 141
  Boston Beany, Open-face, 141
  Cheeseburgers, 141
  Deviled Rye, 142
  Egg, Open-faced, 142
  French-fried Swiss, 142
  Grilled Chicken-Ham-Cheddar, 142
  He-man, Open-faced, 143
  International, 143
  Jurassiennes, or Croûtes Comtoises, 143
  Kümmelkäse, 143
  Limburger Onion, or Catsup, 143
  Meringue, Open-faced, 144
  Neufchâtel and Honey, 144
  Newfoundland Toasted Cheese, 148
  Oskar's Ham-Cam, 144
  Pickled Camembert, 145
  Queijo da Serra, 145
  Roquefort Nut, 145
  Smoky, Sturgeon-smoked, 145
  Tangy, 146
  Toasted Cheese, 148
  Unusual--of  Flowers, Hay and Clover, 146
  Vegetarian, 146
  Witch's, 147
  Xochomilco, 147
  Yolk Picnic, 147
Sauce
  Cheese, 131
  Mornay, 131
  Parsleyed Cheese, 131
Sauce Mornay, 131
Scallopini, Italian-Swiss, 108
Schnitzelbank Pot, 37
Soufflé
  Basic, 95
  Cheese-Corn, 96
  Cheese Fritter, 98
  Cheese-Mushroom, 97
  Cheese-Potato, 97
  Cheese-Sea-food, 97
  Cheese-Spinach, 96
  Cheese-Tomato, 96
  Corn-Cheese, 96
  Mushroom-Cheese, 97
  Parmesan, 95
  Parmesan-Swiss, 96
  Potato-Cheese, 97
  Sea-food-Cheese, 97
  Spinach-Cheese, 96
  Swiss, 96
  Tomato-Cheese, 96
Soup
  Chicken Cheese, 127
  Onion, 126
  Onion, au Gratin, 126
  Supa Shetgia, 133
Spanish Flan--Quesillo, 136
Straws, 133
Stuffed Celery, 132
Supa Shetgia, 133
Swiss Cheese Salad, 129

Three-in-One Mold, 128
Tomato Omelet, 136
Tomatoes au Gratin, 125

Vatroushki, 111

Waffles, Cheese, 112




ABOUT THE AUTHOR

       *       *       *       *       *

Bob Brown, after living thirty years in as many foreign lands and
enjoying countless national cheeses at the source, returned to New
York and summed them all up in this book.

Born in Chicago, he was graduated from Oak Park High School and
entered the University of Wisconsin at the exact moment when a number
of imported Swiss professors in this great dairy state began teaching
their students how to hole an Emmentaler.

After majoring in beer and free lunch from Milwaukee to Munich, Bob
celebrated the end of Prohibition with a book called _Let There Be
Beer!_ and then decided to write another about Beer's best friend,
Cheese. But first he collaborated with his mother Cora and wife Rose
on _The Wine Cookbook_, still in print after nearly twenty-five
years. This first manual on the subject in America paced a baker's
dozen food-and-drink books, including: _America Cooks, 10,000 Snacks,
Fish and Seafood_ and _The South American Cookbook_.

For ten years he published his own weekly magazines in Rio de
Janeiro, Mexico City and London. In the decade before that, from 1907
to 1917, he wrote more than a thousand short stories and serials
under his full name, Robert Carlton Brown. One of his first books,
_What Happened to Mary_, became a best seller and was the first
five-reel movie. This put him in _Who's Who_ in his early twenties.

In 1928 he retired to write and travel. After a couple of years spent
in collecting books and bibelots throughout the Orient, he settled
down in Paris with the expatriate group of Americans and invented the
Reading Machine for their delectation. Nancy Cunard published his
_Words_ and Harry Crosby printed _1450-1950_ at the Black Sun Press,
while in Cagnes-sur-Mer Bob had his own imprint Roving Eye Press,
that turned out _Demonics; Gems, a Censored Anthology; Globe-gliding_
and _Readies for Bob Brown's Machine_ with contributions by Gertrude
Stein, Ezra Pound, Kay Boyle, James T. Farrell _et al._

The depression drove him back to New York, but a decade later he
returned to Brazil that had long been his home away from home. There
he wrote _The Amazing Amazon_, with his wife Rose, making a total of
thirty books bearing his name.

After the death of his wife and mother, Bob Brown closed their
mountain home in Petropolis, Brazil, and returned to New York where
he remarried and now lives, in the Greenwich Village of his
free-lancing youth. With him came the family's working library in a
score of trunks and boxes, that formed the basis of a mail-order book
business in which he specializes today in food, drink and other
out-of-the-way items.

[Compiler's Notes: Moved what was page 1 of project past title page,
removed publisher's copyright information from page 3. Removed references
to Introduction, as it was omitted from the book project.]











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE BOOK OF CHEESE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Woman's Institute Library of Cookery. Volume 2: Milk, Butter and Cheese; Eggs; Vegetables
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Woman's Institute Library of Cookery. Volume 2: Milk, Butter and Cheese; Eggs; Vegetables

Author: Woman's Institute of Domestic Arts and Sciences

Release date: February 1, 2006 [eBook #9936]
                Most recently updated: December 27, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Keren Vergon, Steve Schulze
        and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMAN'S INSTITUTE LIBRARY OF COOKERY. VOLUME 2: MILK, BUTTER AND CHEESE; EGGS; VEGETABLES ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Keren Vergon, Steve Schulze
and PG Distributed Proofreaders











WOMAN'S INSTITUTE LIBRARY OF COOKERY

VOLUME TWO


MILK, BUTTER, AND CHEESE

EGGS

VEGETABLES




WOMENS INSTITUTE OF DOMESTIC ARTS AND SCIENCES, Inc.



PREFACE

This volume, which is the second of the Woman's Institute Library of
Cookery, deals with such essentials of diet as the dairy products--milk,
butter, and cheese--the protein food, eggs, and the energy-producing
nutrients, vegetables.

In _Milk, Butter, and Cheese_, Parts 1 and 2, are explained the place
that milk occupies in the diet, its composition, grades, and the dishes
for which it is used; the purchase, care, and use of butter and butter
substitutes; and the characteristics, care, and varieties of both
domestic and imported cheeses, as well as a number of excellent recipes
for cheese dishes. A luncheon menu, in which a cheese dish is
substituted for meat, is of interest in this connection, for it shows
the housewife, early in her studies, not only how to combine dishes to
produce a balanced meal, but also how to make up a menu in which meat is
not needed.

In _Eggs_ are discussed the nutritive value of eggs, the ways in which
to select, preserve, cook, and serve them, and how to utilize left-over
eggs. So many uses have eggs in the diet and so nourishing is this food
that too much attention cannot be paid to its preparation. In this
lesson, also, is given a breakfast menu to afford practice in preparing
several simple dishes usually served in this meal.

In _Vegetables_, Parts 1 and 2, every variety of vegetable is discussed
as to food value, preparation, place in the meal, and proper methods of
serving. With such a fund of knowledge, the housewife will be well
equipped to give pleasing variety to her meals.

In addition to the instruction in these matters, there are a large
number of illustrations, which make clear the important details in every
process employed and in many recipes show certain steps as well as the
finished result. With such detailed information, it is our desire that
as many of the recipes as possible be tried, for it is only through
constant practice that the rules and principles of cookery will become
thoroughly instilled in the mind. Nothing is of more value to the
housewife than such a knowledge of food and its preparation, for, as
every one knows, proper diet is the chief requisite of good health.

To be of the greatest assistance to the woman in the home is the purpose
of these volumes--to relieve her household tasks of much of their
drudgery and to help her come to a realization of the opportunity for
good that is hers. In no better way can she create happiness and
contentment in her home than by preparing appetizing, nutritious meals
and serving them in the most attractive manner.



CONTENTS

MILK, BUTTER, AND CHEESE
  Milk in the Diet
  Composition of Milk
  Products Obtained from Milk
  Characteristics of Wholesome Milk
  Grades of Clean Milk
  Preserved Milk
  Milk in the Home
  Recipes for Milk Dishes and Sauces
  Economical Use of Butter
  Flavor and Composition of Butter
  Purchase and Care of Butter
  Cooking With Butter
  Serving Butter
  Butter Substitutes
  Characteristics and Care of Cheese
  Imported Cheese
  Domestic Cheese
  Serving Cheese
  Recipes for Cheese Dishes
  Luncheon Menu

EGGS
  Description of Eggs and Place in the Diet
  Nutritive Value of Eggs
  Selection of Eggs
  Preservation of Eggs
  Cooking of Eggs
  Serving of Eggs
  Egg Recipes
  Use of Left-Over Eggs
  Breakfast Menu

VEGETABLES
  Variety in Vegetables
  Structure, Composition, and Food Value
  Purchase and Care of Vegetables
  Classification of Vegetables
  Methods of Preparing and Cooking Vegetables
  Sauces for Vegetables
  Asparagus and Its Preparation
  Beans and Their Preparation
  Beets and Their Preparation
  Brussels Sprouts and Their Preparation
  Cabbage and Its Preparation
  Carrots and Their Preparation
  Cauliflower and Its Preparation
  Celery and Its Preparation
  Corn and Its Preparation
  Cucumbers and Their Preparation
  Eggplant and Its Preparation
  French Artichokes and Their Preparation
  Greens and Their Preparation
  Jerusalem Artichokes and Their Preparation
  Kohlrabi and Its Preparation
  Lentils and Their Preparation
  Mushrooms and Their Preparation
  Okra and Its Preparation
  Onions and Their Preparation
  Parsnips and Their Preparation
  Peas and Their Preparation
  Peppers and Their Preparation
  White Potatoes and Their Preparation
  Sweet Potatoes and Their Preparation
  Radishes and Their Preparation
  Salsify and Its Preparation
  Squash and Its Preparation
  Tomatoes and Their Preparation
  Turnips and Their Preparation
  Vegetable Combinations
  Serving Vegetables

       *       *       *       *       *



MILK, BUTTER, AND CHEESE (PART 1)

       *       *       *       *       *

MILK

MILK IN THE DIET

1. As is well understood, milk is the liquid that is secreted by the
mammary glands of female mammals for the nourishment of their young. The
word milk as it is commonly used, however, refers to _cow's milk,_
because such milk is employed to a greater extent as human food than the
milk from any other animal. Cow's milk in its perfectly fresh raw state
is a yellowish-white, opaque fluid, called _whole milk,_ and, as is well
known, possesses a distinctly sweet taste and characteristic odor. When
such milk is allowed to stand for some time without being disturbed, it
separates into two distinct layers, an upper and a lower one. The upper
layer, which is lighter than the lower one and occupies a smaller space,
consists largely of globules of fat and is called _cream;_ the lower
layer, which is white or bluish-white in color and is composed of water,
solids, and protein, is, when separated from the cream, called
_skim milk._

2. As an article of diet, milk is very important, because its sole
function in nature is to serve as food. It is required by the infant; it
is needed in the diet of all growing children; and it is desirable in
the preparation of dishes for both young and old.

Milk is used to such a great extent because it fills many of the
requirements of an ideal food. It is generally liked, requires little or
no time for preparation, agrees with the majority of persons when used
properly, and contains substances that supply energy and build and
repair tissue. Still, it does not contain these substances in such
proportions as to make it an ideal or exclusive article of diet for
adults, and it must often be modified to suit the needs of infants,
because it is ideal for only the young of the species for which it is
intended. Therefore, while milk is often called a perfect food, in
reality it is perfect for only the calf. When it is desired for the
feeding of a very young child, it must be changed to meet the
requirements before it can be used with good results.

3. So important is milk as an article of food that, outside of the
purely rural districts, producing the milk supply is a business of
considerable importance. This is due to the fact that the purity of milk
must be constantly safeguarded in order that clean, safe milk may be
provided for the countless numbers that depend on it. In fact, milk
undoubtedly bears a closer relation to public health than any other
food. To produce an adequate amount of clean, safe, pure milk is one of
the food problems of the city and country alike. In the city much of the
difficulty is overcome by the ordinances that provide standards of
composition and cleanliness, as well as inspection to insure them; but
such ordinances are rarely provided for in villages and country
districts.

When there is no law to prevent it, unclean milk is sometimes used in
the manufacture of butter and cheese, but when this happens, great
injustice, if not positive harm, is done to the consumers of these
articles. Then, too, unless milk is carefully inspected, tubercular milk
is liable to be used in the making of butter, and such a condition will
cause the spreading of tuberculosis as readily as the use of the
contaminated milk itself.

4. With its various products, milk helps to form a very large part of
the dietary in most homes, but while nothing can take the place of this
food and while it is high in food value, there seems to be a general
tendency to think of it as an addition to the bill of fare, rather than
as a possible substitute for more expensive food. For instance, milk is
very often served as a beverage in a meal in which the quantity of meat
or other protein foods is not reduced. From an economical standpoint, as
well as from the point of view of the needs of the body, this is really
extravagant, for milk is itself largely a protein food. The serving of a
glass of milk or of a dish that contains generous quantities of milk
offers the housewife an opportunity to cut down considerably the
allowance of meat and eggs. Because of this fact and because milk and
its products may be used to add nutritive value to a food, to give
variety, and to improve flavor, they deserve considerable study on the
part of the housewife.

5. Since milk may be used in such a variety of ways, it may be easily
included in the dietary for the family. Being liquid in form, it may
always be served without any preparation as a beverage or with other
beverages, cereals, and fruits. It also has numerous other uses, being
employed in the making of sauces for vegetables and meats, in the place
of stock for soups, and as the liquid for bread, cakes, puddings,
custards, and many frozen desserts. Because of its extensive use, every
housewife not only should know how to buy milk and care for it, but
should be familiar with its composition, so that she may determine
whether or not it suits the needs of her family. In addition, she should
know the effect of heat on milk and the various methods of preparation
if she would be able to judge what food combinations can be used
with milk.


COMPOSITION OF MILK

6. As milk is usually taken into the body in liquid form, the common
tendency is to regard it as a beverage, rather than as an important
source of nourishing food material. However, a knowledge of its
composition, as well as the fact that milk becomes a solid food in the
stomach and must then be dissolved in the process of digestion, will
serve to show that milk contains solids. That it possesses all the
elements required to sustain life and promote health is proved by the
fact that a child may live for months on milk alone and during this time
increase in weight.

7. The solids contained in milk are proteins, fat, carbohydrate in the
form of sugar, and mineral salts, besides which, of course, water occurs
in large quantities. The sugar and fat of milk serve as fuel; the
mineral salts are chiefly valuable for the growth of bones and teeth and
for their effect on the liquids of the body; and the proteins, like the
fat and sugar, serve as fuel, but they also make and repair the muscular
tissues of the body.

In considering the food substances of milk, it will be well to note also
that they vary according to the breed, feeding, and individual
characteristics of the cow. Jerseys and Guernseys give milk rich in fat
and total solids, and while Holstein cows give a greater quantity of
milk, such milk has a smaller proportion of fat and total solids. As a
rule, though, the composition of milk may be considered as approximately
3.3 per cent. protein, 4 per cent. fat, 5 per cent. carbohydrate, and
.7 per cent. mineral matter, making a total of 13 per cent. This
indicates the quantity of actual food material in milk, the remainder,
or 87 per cent., being water.

8. PROTEIN IN MILK.--Because of the double usefulness of protein--to
serve as fuel and to make and repair muscular tissue--this element is
regarded as an important ingredient of milk. The protein in milk is
called _casein_. The opaque whiteness of milk is largely due to the
presence of this substance. As long as milk remains sweet, the lime
salts it contains hold this casein in solution; but when it sours, the
salts are made soluble and the casein thickens, or coagulates. In
addition to casein, milk contains a small amount of protein in the form
of _albumin_. This substance, upon being heated, coagulates and causes
the formation of the skin that is always found on the top of milk that
has been heated. The skin thus formed contains everything that is found
in milk, because, as it forms, casein is dried with it and sugar and
fat, too, are caught and held there. It is the protein of milk and its
characteristic coagulation that are made use of in the making of cheese.
In cooking, the protein of milk is probably more affected than any of
the other substances, but the degree to which the digestion of milk is
thus affected is not definitely known, this being a much
disputed question.

9. FAT IN MILK.--The other substance in milk that serves as fuel, or to
produce energy, is fat. It occurs in the form of tiny particles, each
surrounded by a thin covering and suspended in the liquid. Such a
mixture, which is called an _emulsion_, is the most easily digested form
in which fat is found. The fat in milk varies more than the other food
substances, it being sometimes as low as 2 per cent, and again as high
as 6 per cent. However, the average of these two, or 4 per cent., is the
usual amount found in most milk.

As has been mentioned, the fat globules of milk rise to the top because
fat is lighter than water, so that when milk has been undisturbed for
some time the top, which is known as _cream_, will be found to contain
most of the fat. Because of the fat it contains, the cream is yellower
in color than the milk underneath. If the cream is beaten, or churned,
these fat particles will adhere in a mass, advantage of this fact being
taken in the making of butter.

10. CARBOHYDRATE IN MILK.--The carbohydrate contained in milk is in the
form of sugar called _lactose_. It is unlike other sugars in that it is
not very sweet and does not disagree with most persons nor upset their
digestion. For this reason, it is often given to children, invalids, and
persons who have digestive disturbances. However, it is like other
carbohydrates in that in solution it ferments. The result of the
fermentation in this case is the production of _lactic acid_, which
makes the milk sour. With the fat, lactose makes up the bulk of the
energy-producing material of milk, and while this is important it is
only secondary when compared to the tissue-building power of the protein
and minerals. Besides being an important part of milk itself, lactose is
a valuable by-product in the manufacture of cheese. After being taken
from _whey_, which is the clear, straw-colored liquid that remains when
the curd, or coagulated portion, is completely removed from the milk,
the lactose is refined and sold in the form of a powder that is used for
various kinds of infant and invalid feeding.

11. MINERAL MATTER IN MILK.--Considerable quantities of mineral salts,
which are chiefly _lime_, _potash_, and _phosphates_, are found in milk.
As has already been pointed out, these are important in the building of
bone and hard tissue in the body, but in addition they help to keep the
fluids of the body in the right condition. Because of the work they do,
these mineral salts are necessary in the building of the bodies of
growing children, and are useful for repair and the regulation of the
body processes in adults. In cheese, butter, and cream, which are the
products of milk, less of the mineral salts are found in proportion to
the quantity than in whole milk, skim milk, and whey.

12. WATER IN MILK.--The percentage of water in milk is much greater than
that of all the other food substances combined, there being more than
six times as much. While this quantity seems very large, it is an
advantage, for milk provides nourishment to persons when they can take
neither solid nor more condensed food. On the other hand, the water is a
disadvantage, for it is responsible for the rapid spoiling of milk. This
fact is clearly shown in the case of condensed milk, where the water is
partly or completely evaporated, for milk of this kind keeps much longer
without spoiling than either whole or skim milk.


PRODUCTS OBTAINED FROM MILK

13. Although milk is used extensively in its natural liquid form,
considerable use is also made of the numerous products of milk, chief
among which are cream, skim milk, buttermilk, sour milk, whey, butter,
and cheese. In fact, all of these occupy such an important place in the
dietary of the majority of homes that it is well for every housewife to
understand their value. Butter and cheese are discussed in detail later,
so that at this time no attention need be given to them. The other
products, however, are taken up now, with the intention of enabling the
housewife to familiarize herself with their production, nature, and use.

14. CREAM.--As has been pointed out, the particles of fat that rise to
the top of milk when it is allowed to remain undisturbed for some time
form the product known as cream. Cream may be removed from the milk by
skimming it off, or it may be separated from the milk by means of
machinery especially designed for the purpose. The greater the
proportion of fat in milk, the thicker, or "heavier," will be the cream.

Various grades of separated cream are placed on the market, the usual
ones being those which contain 8, 12, 16, 20, and 40 per cent, of fat.
Thin cream, which includes the grades that have only a small percentage
of fat, contains a larger quantity of milk than the others and is not so
desirable for many purposes. Still, it is used to some extent, because
it is cheaper and there are definite uses to which it can be put.
Medium-heavy cream is the kind to select when it is desired for
_whipping_. This is a process that consists in beating the cream rapidly
until a mass of tiny bubbles form and become stiff, very much as the
white of egg does.

15. SKIM MILK.--After a part or all of the cream has been removed from
whole milk, that which remains is called skim milk. While practically
all of the fat is taken out when milk is skimmed, very little protein or
sugar is removed. Therefore, skim milk is still a valuable food, it
being used to a large extent for cheese making, for the manufacture of
certain commercial foods, and for the feeding of animals. The housewife
does not, as a rule, buy skim milk; indeed, in some localities the laws
prevent its sale because it is considered an adulterated food. However,
it is really a wholesome, valuable food that is cheaper than whole milk,
and its use in the home should therefore be encouraged from an
economical standpoint. Here it may be used in the preparation of many
dishes, such as sauces, cakes, biscuits, muffins, griddle cakes, bread,
etc., in which butter or other fats are used, and in custards, puddings,
ices, and numerous other desserts.

16. BUTTERMILK.--The milk that remains in butter making after the butter
fat has been removed from cream by churning is known by the name
buttermilk. Such milk is similar to skim milk in composition, and unless
butter is made of sweet cream, buttermilk is sour. Buttermilk is used
considerably as a beverage, but besides this use there are numerous ways
in which it may be employed in the preparation of foods, as is pointed
out in various recipes. An advantage of buttermilk is that its cost is
less than that of whole milk, so that the housewife will do well to make
use of it in the preparation of those foods in which it produces
satisfactory results.

17. ARTIFICIAL BUTTERMILK.--Several kinds of sour milk that are called
buttermilk are to be had, particularly at soda fountains and
restaurants. While they are similar to buttermilk they are not the same,
because they are produced artificially from whole or skimmed sweet milk.
The usual method employed in the making of these artificial buttermilks,
as they may well be called, consists in adding to sweet milk tablets
containing lactic acid or a certain culture of bacteria that induce
fermentation, very much as yeast does, and then keeping it at about body
temperature for a number of hours in order to allow the milk to thicken
and sour. Such milks exert a beneficial action in the digestive tract,
and their food value, provided they are made from whole milk, is just as
high as that of the original sweet milk. Artificial buttermilks
therefore prove a valuable source of food supply for persons who find
them palatable and who do not care for sweet milk. Their food value may
be increased by adding cream to them.

18. SOUR MILK.--Ordinary milk contains large numbers of bacteria that
produce fermentation. When it is allowed to stand for some time, these
bacteria act upon the sugar, or lactose, contained in the milk and
change it into lactic acid. This acid gives to the milk a sour taste and
at the same time causes the casein of the milk to become a mass known as
_curd_, or _clabber_. This mass continues to grow sour and tough until
all the milk sugar is converted into lactic acid, so that the longer the
milk stands, the more acid it becomes. Sour milk, however, is useful
in the preparation of various dishes, such as hot breads and
griddle cakes.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

19. WHEY.--When the curd is completely removed from milk, as in making
cheese, a clear, light, yellowish liquid known as whey remains. Whey is
composed of water, minerals, and milk sugar or lactic acid, and is the
least valuable part of the milk. The ingenious housewife will never be
at a loss to make use of this product, for, while its food value is
slight, the minerals it contains are important ones. Whey is sometimes
used to furnish the liquid for bread making and, in addition, it may be
used as a beverage for persons who cannot digest food as heavy as
milk itself.

20. COMPARISON OF FOOD VALUES OF MILK PRODUCTS.--So that the housewife
may become familiar with the food values of milk products, there is here
given, in Fig. 1, a graphic table for the comparison of such products.
Each glass is represented as containing approximately 1 pint or 1 pound
of the milk product, and the figures underneath each indicate the number
of calories found in the quantity represented. The triangle at the side
of each indicates the proportion of ash, protein, fat, carbohydrate, and
water, the percentage composition being given at the side. Housewives as
a rule fully appreciate the food value that is to be found in whole milk
and cream, but such products as skim milk, buttermilk, and whey are
likely to be ignored.


CHARACTERISTICS OF WHOLESOME MILK

21. So far as the housewife is concerned, the qualities that
characterize wholesome milk are without doubt of great interest. She may
know of what use milk is in the diet and the food substances of which it
is composed, but unless she understands just what constitutes milk of
good quality, as well as the nature of inferior milk, she cannot very
well provide her family with the kind it should have. Therefore, to
assist her in this matter, the characteristics of wholesome milk are
here discussed. Such milk, it will be well to note, must be of the right
composition, must not be adulterated, must be fresh--that is, not older
when delivered than is permitted by law--and must be as clean
as possible.

22. STANDARD OF MILK COMPOSITION.--The housewife usually judges the
quality of milk by the amount of cream that rises to the top when milk
in a bottle is allowed to remain undisturbed for some time. This is
really an excellent test, because milk that contains only a small amount
of cream is of poorer quality than that which contains a larger amount;
in other words, the more cream milk contains, the higher will be its
food value and the greater its energy-producing ability. Then, too, milk
that is rich in cream usually contains proportionately large amounts of
protein and sugar.

While the composition of milk has much to do with the quality of this
food, it varies, as should be noted, in different breeds and even in
individual cows, depending on both the food and the care given to them.
For this reason, milk that is mixed is preferable to the milk of a
single cow, as the mixing of the milk of a number of cows insures a
better average composition.

23. ADULTERATION OF MILK.--The composition of milk, and hence its
quality, is seriously affected by its adulteration. By this is meant the
extraction of any of the food substances from whole milk; the addition
of anything that tends to weaken or lower its quality or strength; the
use of coloring matter to make it appear of greater value than it
actually is; or the use of preservatives to prevent it from souring as
soon as it ordinarily would. It is, of course, illegal to adulterate
milk, yet it is sometimes done. The most convenient and possibly the
most common materials used to adulterate milk are water and skim milk.
The addition of water to milk decreases the quantity of all its food
substances, but the addition of skim milk reduces the quantity of fat
only. The color of the milk is often affected by the use of these
adulterants, but when this happens, yellow coloring is usually added to
restore the original appearance.

Sometimes the milk that a dairyman markets contains more fat than the
law requires; but even such milk cannot legally be skimmed nor diluted
with skim milk. The only thing that may be done to it is to mix it with
milk that is low in butter fat and thus obtain a milk that will average
the legal percentage. For instance, if milk from a dairy averages 5 per
cent, of butter fat, it may be diluted with milk that contains only 3
per cent, of butter fat, because the result of such mixing, which will
be milk averaging 4 per cent, of this food substance, will be the
legal standard.

24. To prevent milk from souring, dishonest milk dealers often put into
it such preservatives as soda, borax, and formaldehyde. There is no
definite way of telling whether or not one of these has been used,
except by a chemical analysis. However, if milk does not sour within a
reasonable time when no precautions have been taken to keep it sweet, it
should be looked on with suspicion, for it undoubtedly contains a
preservative.

25. FRESHNESS OF MILK.--To be most satisfactory for all purposes, milk
should be absolutely fresh. However, it is almost impossible to obtain
milk in this condition, because it is generally sold at a distance from
the source of supply. Milk that is sold in small towns and cities is
usually 12 and often 18 to 21 hours old when it is delivered; whereas,
in large cities, where the demand is so great that milk must be shipped
from great distances, it is often 24 to 36 or even 48 hours old when it
reaches the consumer. In order that milk may remain sweet long enough to
permit it to be delivered at places so far removed from the source of
supply, it must be handled and cared for in the cleanest possible way by
the dealers. Likewise, if the housewife desires to get the best results
from it, she must follow the same plan, cooling it immediately on
delivery and keeping it cool until it is consumed. The freshness of milk
can be determined only by the length of time it will remain sweet when
proper care is given to it.

26. CLEANLINESS OF MILK.--Milk may be of the right composition, free
from all adulteration, and as fresh as it is possible to obtain it, but
unless it is clean, it is an injurious food. Milk is rendered unclean or
impure by dirt. In reality, there are two kinds of dirt that may be
present in milk, and it is important to know just what these are and
what effect they have on milk.

27. The less harmful of the two kinds of dirt is the visible dirt that
gets into the milk from the cow, the stable, the milker, the milking
utensils, and similar sources when these are not scrupulously clean. If
milk containing such dirt is allowed to stand long enough in pans or
bottles for the heavier particles to settle, it will be found as
sediment in the bottom of the receptacle. To say the least, the presence
of such dirt is always disagreeable and frequently produces
foreign flavors.

Straining the milk through clean absorbent cotton will reveal the
presence of such dirt and another kind of dirt that does not show
through the opaque fluid. This second kind of dirt is generally found in
milk when the first kind is present in any quantity. It is more liable
to be harmful than the other, because it enters the milk from the water
used in cleaning the receptacles or from some contaminated source.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

28. Whenever dirt is present in milk, bacteria are sure to be there; and
the greater the quantity of dirt the greater will be the number of
bacteria. Should the housewife desire to compare the cleanliness of
several lots of milk, she may filter a like quantity from each lot, say
a quart or a pint, through small disks of absorbent cotton. If, after
the milk has passed through the cotton disk, very little dirt remains on
it, as in Fig. 2 (_a_), the milk may be considered as comparatively
clean; if the cotton disk appears as in (_b_), the milk may be said to
be only slightly dirty; if it appears as in (_c_), the milk is dirty;
and if it appears as in (_d_), the milk is very dirty. Milk that leaves
a stain like that in (_d_) contains more bacteria than milk that leaves
a stain like that in (_c_), and so on through all the lots of milk.
Filtering milk in this manner, however, does not indicate whether the
bacteria are disease producing. Such information can be secured only by
microscopic examination, and only then by persons who have a knowledge
of such matters.

29. Since, as has been pointed out, bacteria cling to all dirt, the
dirt that milk contains is one of the causes of souring and putrefaction
of milk, and may be a cause of disease. Indeed, it is definitely known
that dirty milk sours much more quickly than does clean milk. Actual
tests in which clean milk was put in a cool place have proved that it
will keep for weeks, whereas dirty milk will sour in a day or two,
especially in warm weather. This information should point out clearly to
the housewife that it is not merely heat that changes milk or causes it
to sour. She should understand in addition, that bacteria grow and
multiply very rapidly when conditions for their growth are provided.
These conditions are moisture, warmth, and the right kind of food, and
as all of these are found in milk, this product is really ideal for
bacterial development. The only way in which to protect milk is to make
sure that no bacteria enter it, or, if they do, to make it impossible
for them to grow. This may be done by keeping the milk so cold that they
cannot thrive, or by destroying them in various ways, which are taken
up later.

30. In former times, there was not much danger of wide-spread disease
from the milk supply, for it was cared for almost entirely by those who
kept a few cows and distributed milk to a small number of customers. In
fact, it has been only within the past 50 years that large quantities of
milk are handled by separate dairies and shipped great distances from
the source of supply and that the distribution of milk has become a
great industry. When so much milk is handled in one place, it is more or
less unsafe unless the dairy is kept extremely clean and is conducted in
the most sanitary manner. Experience has shown that too much attention
cannot be given to the care of milk, for the lives of great numbers of
children have been sacrificed through the carelessness of dairymen and
persons selling and distributing milk, as well as through the negligence
of those who handle the milk after it has entered the home. To overcome
much of this carelessness, both the Federal Government and the various
states of this country have set standards for safe milk production, and
in order to make their laws effective have established inspection
service. Independently of these state and national laws, many of the
cities, particularly the large ones, have made their own standards,
which, as a rule, are very rigid. One of the usual requirements is to
compel each person who wishes to sell milk in the city to buy a license,
so that the city authorities may keep in touch with those handling milk
and so that conditions may be investigated at any time. In view of the
care required of dealers in handling milk, the housewife owes it to
herself and the members of her family to keep the milk in the home in
the best possible manner.


GRADES OF CLEAN MILK

31. Ever since milk has come to be a commercial product, authorities
have been devising ways in which it may be brought to the consumer in a
condition that will permit it to be used without causing ill results.
Their efforts have been rewarded to such an extent that nowadays
consumers have little to fear from the milk they purchase, provided they
get it from dealers who live up to the laws. Chief among the different
grades of clean milk is _certified milk,_ and next in order comes
_pasteurized milk,_ followed by _sterilized milk_.

32. CERTIFIED MILK.--The grade of clean milk sold under the name of
certified milk is simply natural, raw milk that is produced and marketed
under conditions that permit it to be guaranteed as pure, wholesome, and
of definite composition. Such milk is necessarily higher in price than
milk that is less wholesome and sanitary, because of the extra cost to
the dairyman in meeting the requirements that make it possible for him
to produce clean milk under sanitary conditions. These requirements
pertain to the health and cleanliness of those who handle the milk, to
the health, housing condition, and care of the herd and the dairy cows,
and to the handling and care of milk in the dairy and during
transportation and delivery. They are usually established and enforced
by an inspection commission appointed by the city, county, or state in
which the milk is produced.

33. If a little careful thought is given to the milk situation, it will
be admitted that such precautions are necessary if clean milk is to be
the result. Such milk cannot be produced if the surroundings are dirty,
because dust and flies, which are two sources of contamination, are
practically always present in such places. A stable with poor
ventilation, without screens to keep out flies, and with floors that
will not permit of cleaning, but cause filth and refuse to accumulate,
is sure to contaminate milk that is handled in it. In addition, cows
that are not well fed, comfortably housed, or carefully groomed cannot
be expected to give milk of as good quality as cows that are properly
cared for. Likewise, if the persons who do the milking are not clean,
the milk is subject to contamination from this source.

34. All such unfavorable conditions can be remedied, and must be in the
production of certified milk; but the good accomplished in this
direction will be lost if the milk is carelessly handled after milking.
Therefore, in producing certified milk, only the cleanest water
available is allowed to be used in the dairy. Impure water is a common
source of the contamination of milk in such places. On some farms, the
water supply comes from a well that is too near the barn or that is too
shallow to avoid being made impure by the germs that filter into it from
the barnyard or a cesspool. If vessels in which milk is placed are
washed in such water, it is necessary to sterilize them by boiling or
steaming before milk is put into them, in order to kill the germs that
come from the water. If such a precaution as this is not observed, the
germs will multiply rapidly in the milk and, provided they are
disease-producing, will make the milk extremely dangerous.

Besides observing the precautions mentioned, it is necessary that all
utensils used in a dairy, such as pails for milking, strainers,
containers, etc., be kept scrupulously clean. Likewise, they must be
sterilized by boiling each time they are used, for, while disease germs
may be absent, those which cause the milk to sour are always present and
must be destroyed. Finally, to prevent any germs that enter milk from
multiplying, even when it is properly cared for, the milk has to be
cooled to a temperature of 45 degrees Fahrenheit or lower immediately
after milking and then bottled in sterilized bottles, sealed, and packed
in ice, within 20 minutes after milking.

35. It is by giving attention to all such matters that certified milk is
possible. Such milk, as will be understood from what has been said, is
neither a cooked milk nor a dirty milk that is processed, but a natural,
raw milk that is clean at all stages of its production and marketing.
Because of this fact, it is the best and cleanest milk to be had and may
be used without hesitation, not only by grown persons in good health,
but for infants and invalids.

The sanitary condition of certified milk and the consequent length of
time it will remain sweet was demonstrated conclusively as far back as
1900 at the Paris Exposition. At this time, two model dairies in the
United States--one located at the University of Illinois and the other
at Briarcliff Manor, Westchester County, New York--delivered to their
booths at the Exposition milk that was bottled under the most sanitary
conditions at their dairies. During its transit across the ocean the
milk was kept at a temperature of 40 to 42 degrees Fahrenheit, and on
its arrival, 2 weeks after leaving the dairies, it was found to be in a
perfectly sweet condition. Similar experiments made at later dates, such
as shipping certified milk from the East to California, serve to bear
out the test made in 1900, and prove what can be done with milk so
produced as to be as free as possible from bacteria or the conditions
that permit their growth.

36. PASTEURIZED MILK.--While certified milk is undoubtedly the safest
kind of milk to use and is constantly growing in favor, much of the milk
received in the home is pasteurized. By pasteurized milk is meant milk
that has been heated to a temperature of 140 to 155 degrees Fahrenheit,
kept at this temperature for 15 to 20 minutes, and then cooled rapidly.
The result of such a treatment is that any disease-producing germs that
are present in the milk, as well as those which are likely to cause
intestinal disturbances, are destroyed, and that the milk is rendered
safe as food for a time. Pasteurizing does not materially change the
taste of milk, nor does it seriously affect the digestive properties of
this food. It is true, of course, that pasteurized milk is not so good
as clean raw milk. Still it is better to use such milk than to run the
risk of using milk that might be contaminated with the germs of
tuberculosis, typhoid fever, scarlet fever, diphtheria, or any other of
the numerous diseases that have been known to be carried to whole
families and communities through the milk supply.

37. Although pasteurizing is done on a large scale in dairies, there is
no reason why the housewife cannot pasteurize the milk she buys,
provided it is raw milk and she feels that it is not safe to use. If
pasteurizing is to be done frequently and large quantities of milk are
to be treated, it would be advisable to purchase the convenient
apparatus that is to be had. However, if only a small quantity of milk
is to be pasteurized at a time, a simple improvised outfit will prove
satisfactory, because milk pasteurized in the home may be heated in the
bottles in which it is received. Such an outfit consists of a dairy
thermometer, a deep vessel, and a perforated pie tin or a wire rack of
suitable size.

38. To pasteurize milk in the home, proceed in the manner illustrated
in Fig. 3. Place the rack or invert the perforated pie tin in the bottom
of the vessel, and on it place the bottles of milk from which the caps
have not been removed. Make a hole through the cap of one bottle, and
insert the thermometer into the milk through this hole. Then fill the
vessel with cold water to within an inch or so of the top of the
bottles, taking care not to put in so much water as to make the bottles
float. Place the vessel over the fire, heat it until the thermometer in
the bottle registers a few degrees over 150 degrees Fahrenheit, and keep
the milk at this temperature for 15 to 20 minutes. At the end of this
time, the milk will be sufficiently pasteurized and may be removed from
the fire. As soon as it is taken from the water, cool it as rapidly as
possible by running cold water into the vessel slowly or by placing the
bottles in several changes of water, taking care not to place the hot
bottles in very cold water at first, as this may cause them to crack.

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

When the milk has been cooled by some rapid method, keep it cool until
it is used. This precaution is necessary because of the nature of
pasteurized milk. The temperature at which milk is pasteurized is
sufficient to kill all fully developed bacteria, but those which exist
in an undeveloped state, or in the form of spores, develop very rapidly
after pasteurization unless the milk is kept cold and clean. If these
bacteria were allowed to develop, the purpose of pasteurization would be
lost, and the milk would become as dangerous as it was originally. The
advantage of cooling milk rapidly will be fully appreciated upon
referring to Fig. 4, which illustrates the development of a single germ
in milk that is cooled rapidly and in milk that is cooled slowly.

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

39. STERILIZED MILK.--By sterilized milk is meant milk in which all
germs are destroyed by sterilization. Such milk is not sold by dealers,
but the process of sterilization is resorted to in the home when
pasteurization is not sufficient to render milk safe. This process,
which is the only positive means of destroying all germs, consists in
bringing the milk to the boiling point, or 212 degrees Fahrenheit,
allowing it to boil for three quarters of an hour, and then cooling it
rapidly. One who undertakes to treat milk in this way should remember
that it is difficult to boil milk, because the solids in the milk adhere
to the bottom and sides of the vessel and soon burn. However, this
difficulty can be overcome by sterilizing the milk in the bottles in
which it is bought.

40. To sterilize milk, place the sealed bottles on a wire rack or a
perforated pie tin in a deep vessel, as for the pasteurizing of milk,
and pour cold water into the vessel until it nearly covers the bottles.
Then raise the temperature of the water quickly to the boiling point,
and after it has begun to bubble, allow it to boil for three quarters of
an hour. At the end of this time, cool the milk rapidly and then keep it
cool until it is used.

41. Although milk thus treated becomes safe, sterilization changes its
flavor and digestibility. If milk of this kind must be used, some raw
food should be given with it. A diet composed entirely of cooked food is
not so ideal as one in which some raw food is included, because raw
foods contain substances that are essential to health. The change that
takes place in the composition of milk that has been sterilized can be
easily observed. Such milk on becoming sour does not coagulate as does
pasteurized or raw milk, owing to the fact that the lime salts in the
milk are so changed by the high temperature as to prevent the thickening
process from taking place. Then, too, sterilized milk is not likely to
become sour even after considerable time. Still, such milk is not safe
to use except when it is fresh, for instead of fermenting in the usual
way it putrefies and is liable to cause such a dangerous sickness as
ptomaine poisoning.

42. MODIFIED MILK.--For infants who cannot be fed their normal diet,
cow's milk must be used as a substitute, but in order to make it a more
nearly ideal food for them it must usually be modified, or changed, by
adding other materials. When it is so treated, it is known as modified
milk. The materials used to modify milk are sterile water, lime water,
barley water, cream, skim milk, milk sugar, or some other easily
digested carbohydrate, one of these or a combination of them always
being employed. The proportion of these ingredients to use varies with
the age of the child that is to be fed and must be constantly changed to
meet the child's requirements. In the production of modified milk, a
physician's prescription and directions should always be followed
closely. Only the best quality of milk should be used, and, in addition,
the greatest care should be taken to have all the bottles, utensils, and
materials used as clean and sterile as it is possible to make them. If
such conditions cannot be met, it is advisable to pasteurize the
modified-milk mixture after the materials have been put together.


PRESERVED MILK

43. Besides milk that is commonly sold by dairymen and milk dealers, it
is possible to buy in the market many grades of so-called PRESERVED
MILK. Such milk is produced by driving off all or part of the water
contained in milk, and it is sold as _condensed, evaporated,_ and
_powdered milk_. Usually, it is put up in tin cans, and while it is not
used so extensively as regular milk, many firms are engaged in its
preparation.

44. CONDENSED AND EVAPORATED MILK.--As has just been mentioned,
condensed and evaporated milk is produced by the complete or partial
evaporation of the water contained in milk. Such milk can be shipped
long distances or kept for long periods of time, because it does not
contain sufficient moisture to permit the growth of bacteria. In
evaporating milk to produce these preserved milks, each gallon is
diminished in quantity to about two and one quarter pints, the original
87 per cent. of water being reduced to about 25 per cent. Therefore, in
order to use such milk, sufficient water must be added to restore it to
its original composition. Sometimes comparatively large amounts of cane
sugar are added to such milks, which, besides sweetening them, assist in
their preservation. If cane sugar is not used, the milks are usually
made sterile in order to prevent them from spoiling.

45. POWDERED MILK.--The form of preserved milk known as powdered milk
is the result of completely evaporating the water in milk. Such milk has
the appearance of a dry powdered substance. It does not spoil easily and
is so greatly reduced in quantity that it can be conveniently stored.
Because of these characteristics, this product, for which skim milk is
generally used, is extensively manufactured. It is used chiefly by
bakers and confectioners, and, as in the case of evaporated or condensed
milk, the water that has been evaporated in the powdering process must
be supplied when the milk is used.


STANDARD GRADING OF MILK AND CREAM

46. In order that a definite idea may be formed of the sanitary and
bacteriological standards that are set by milk commissions, there are
here given, in Table I, the regulations governing the grades and
designation of milk and cream that may be sold in the city of New York.
As will be observed from a study of this table, only definite grades of
milk and cream can be sold in that city; likewise, it must conform to
certain standards of purity and the producer must handle it in such a
way that it may be delivered to the consumer in as clean and fresh a
condition as possible.

Without doubt, a grading similar to this one will become general
throughout the United States eventually, for this is the only way by
which the housewife may know with certainty whether or not the milk she
purchases is of the right composition and is safe, fresh, and sanitary
in every respect. The different qualities of milk and cream as shown by
this grading are, of course, sold at different prices, those which
require the greatest care and expense in handling selling for the
highest price.


MILK IN THE HOME

PURCHASE OF MILK

47. After the housewife has become familiar with the points that she
should know concerning milk, she will be much better equipped to
purchase milk of the right kind for her home. However, there are still
some points for her to observe when she is purchasing milk if she would
supply her family with the best quality of this food.

48. In the first place, she should buy milk from a reliable dealer who
will not object to questioning, and, if possible, she should make an
investigation of the dairy that supplies the milk that she uses. If she
cannot investigate the dairy personally, she should at least endeavor to
obtain information from those who are prepared to give it. If she learns
that the conditions in the dairy that is supplying her with milk are not
what they should be, she should try to obtain milk from some other
source. Of course, she should remember that milk of the best and
cleanest quality is the highest in price, because of the increased cost
of production; but it is usually advisable to pay the higher price,
especially if children are to be fed, because cheap milk is liable to be
unsafe, at least for any purpose that will require it to be served
without cooking. Should the income not allow the best quality of milk to
be used for all purposes, a cheaper grade can be used for cooking, but
it is always economical to purchase the best quality when this food is
to be used as a beverage.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

49. In the next place, the housewife should purchase milk from a dealer
who delivers cold milk, because, as has been mentioned, bacteria
multiply rapidly in warm milk. She should also try to obtain milk put up
in bottles, for such milk has advantages over milk dipped from a can in
that it does not have the same chance to become dirty and it affords a
greater opportunity to secure accurate measurement. The kind of caps
used on milk bottles should also be observed. Caps that have to be pried
out with a knife or a similar utensil are not nearly so satisfactory as
those shown in Fig. 5 (_a_), which have small tabs _a_ that permit the
cap to be lifted out. In addition to the caps, which serve to keep dirt
out of the milk and permit it to be delivered without being spilled,
some dealers use covers like that shown in (_b_). Such covers are held
in place by a wire and serve further to protect the milk from
contamination.

If milk purchased in bottles is clean, there should be no sediment in
the bottom of the bottle after it has been allowed to stand for some
time. Also, if it is fresh, it will not sour quickly after it is
delivered, so that in case it is properly cared for and sours quickly,
it may be known to be stale milk. However, if it does not sour in the
normal length of time, it should be looked on with suspicion, for, as
has been pointed out, such milk may have added to it a preservative to
prevent souring. The housewife may expect milk that is delivered cold
and is guaranteed to be sanitary and fresh to remain sweet at least 24
hours, provided, of course, it is placed in the refrigerator immediately
upon delivery and kept there until used.

       *       *       *       *       *

REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE GRADES AND DESIGNATION OF MILK AND CREAM WHICH
MAY BE SOLD IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK

The following classifications apply to milk and cream. The regulations
regarding bacterial content and time of delivery shall not apply to
sour cream.

Grades of Milk or Cream Sold in the City of New York:

GRADE A Milk or cream (Raw)

Definition: Grade A milk or cream (raw) is milk or cream produced and
handled in accordance with the minimum requirements, rules and
regulations as herein set forth.

Tuberculin Test And Physical Condition: 1. Only such cows shall be
admitted to the herd as have not reacted to a diagnostic injection of
tuberculin and are in good physical condition. 2. All cows shall be
tested with tuberculin and all reacting animals shall be excluded
from the herd.

Bacterial Contents: Grade A milk shall not contain more than 60,000
bacteria per cubic centimeter, and cream more than 300,000 bacteria per
cubic centimeter when delivered to the consumer or at any time prior to
such delivery.

Necessary Scores: Equip. 25, Meth. 50, Total 75

Time of Delivery: Shall be delivered within 36 hours after production.

Bottling: Unless otherwise specified in the permit, this milk or cream
shall be delivered to consumers only in bottles.

Labeling: Outer caps of bottles shall be white and shall contain the
words Grade A, Raw, in black letters in large type, and shall state the
name and address of the dealer.

Pasteurization: None.

Milk or cream (Pasteurized)

Definition: Grade A milk or cream (pasteurized) is milk or cream handled
and sold by dealers holding permits therefor from the Board of Health,
and produced and handled in accordance with the requirements, rules, and
regulations as herein set forth.

Tuberculin Test And Physical Condition: No tuberculin test required, but
cows must be healthy as disclosed by physical examination made annually.

Bacterial Contents: Grade A milk (pasteurized) shall not contain more
than 30,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter and cream (pasteurized) more
then 150,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter when delivered to the
consumer or at any time after pasteurization and prior to such delivery.
No milk supply averaging more than 200,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter
shall be pasteurized for sale under this designation.

Necessary Scores: Equip. 25, Meth. 43, Total 68.

Time of Delivery: Shall be delivered within 36 hours after
pasteurization.

Bottling: Unless otherwise specified in the permit, this milk or cream
shall be delivered to the consumer only in bottles.

Labeling: Outer cap of bottles shall be white and contain the word Grade
A in black letters in large type, date and hours between which
pasteurization was completed; place where pasteurization was performed;
name of the person, firm, or corporation offering for sale, selling, or
delivering same.

Pasteurization: Only such milk or cream shall be regarded as pasteurized
as has been subjected to a temperature averaging 145 degrees Fahrenheit
for not less than 30 minutes.

Grade B Milk or cream (Pasteurized)

Definition: Grade B milk or cream (pasteurized) is milk or cream
produced and handled in accordance with the minimal requirements, rules,
and regulations herein set forth and which has been pasteurized in
accordance with the requirements and rules and regulations of the
Department of Health for pasteurization.

Tuberculin Test And Physical Condition: No tuberculin test required, but
cows must be healthy as disclosed by physical examination made annually.

Bacterial Contents: No milk under this grade shall contain more than
100,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter and no claim shall contain more
than 500,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter when delivered to the
consumer or at anytime after pasteurization and prior to such delivery.
No milk supply averaging more than 1,500,000 bacteria per cubic
centimeter shall be pasteurized in this city for sale under this
designation. No milk supply averaging more than 300,000 bacteria per
cubic centimeter shall be pasteurized outside of the city for sale under
this designation.

Necessary Scores: Equip. 20, Meth. 35, Total 55

Time of Delivery: Milk shall be delivered within 36 hours and cream
within 48 hours after pasteurization.

Bottling: May be delivered in cans or bottles.

Labeling: Outer caps of bottles containing milk and tags affixed to cans
containing milk or cream shall be white and marked Grade B in bright
green letters in large type, date pasteurization was completed, place
where pasteurization was performed, name of the person, firm, or
corporation offering for sale, selling, or delivering same. Bottles
containing cream shall be labeled with caps marked Grade B in bright
green letters, in large type and shall give the place and date of
bottling and shall give the name of person, firm, or corporation
offering for sale, selling, or delivering same.

Pasteurization: Only such milk or cream shall be regarded as pasteurized
as has been subjected to a temperature averaging 145 degrees Fahrenheit
for not less than 30 minutes.

Grade C Milk or cream (Pasteurized) (For cooking and manufacturing
purposes only.)

Definition: Grade C milk or cream is milk or cream not conforming to the
requirements of any of the subdivisions of Grade A or Grade B and which
has been pasteurized according to the requirements and rules and
regulations of the Board of Health or boiled for at least two
(2) minutes.

Tuberculin Test And Physical Condition: No tuberculin test required, but
cows must be healthy as disclosed by physical examination made annually.

Bacterial Contents: No milk of this grade shall contain more than
300,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter and no cream of this grade show
contain more than 1,500,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter after
pasteurization.

Necessary Scores: Score 40

Time of Delivery: Shall be delivered within 48 hours after
pasteurization.

Bottling: May be delivered in the cans only.

Labeling: Tags affixed to cans shall be white and shall be marked in red
with the words, Grade C in large type and "for cooking" in plainly
visible type, and cans and shall have properly sealed metal collars,
painted red on necks.

Pasteurization: Only such milk or cream shall be regarded as pasteurized
as has been subjected to a temperature averaging 145 degrees Fahrenheit
for not less than 30 minutes.

NOTE.--Sour milk, buttermilk, sour cream, kumyss, matzoon, zoolac, and
similar products shall not be made from any milk of a less grade than
that designated for Grade B and shall be pasteurized before being put
through the process of souring. Sour cream shall not contained a less
percentage of fats than that designated for cream.

No other words than those designated herein shall appear on the label of
any container containing milk or cream or milk or cream products except
the word certified when authorized under the State law.

       *       *       *       *       *


CARE OF MILK

50. NECESSITY FOR CARE IN THE HOME.--If milk of good quality is bought,
and, as has been suggested, this should be done whenever it is possible,
the next thing to do is to care for it in such a way that it may be fed
to the family in the same condition as it was when delivered. It is, of
course, of prime importance that the dairyman deliver clean fresh milk,
but this is not sufficient; the milk must remain in this condition until
it is used, and this can occur only when the housewife knows how to care
for it properly after it enters the home. It is possible to make safe
milk unsafe and unsafe milk positively dangerous unless the housewife
understands how to care for milk and puts into practice what she knows
concerning this matter. Indeed, some of the blame laid to the careless
handling of milk by dairymen really belongs to housewives, for very
often they do not take care of milk in the right way after delivery. As
too much attention cannot be given to this matter, explicit directions
are here outlined, with the idea of assisting the housewife in this
matter as much as possible.

51. KEEPING MILK CLEAN IN THE HOME.--Immediately upon delivery, the
bottle containing the milk should be placed in the coolest place
available, never being allowed to stand on the porch in the sun or where
such animals as cats or dogs may come in contact with it. When the milk
is to be used, the paper cap should be carefully wiped before it is
removed from the bottle, so that any dirt that may be on top will not
fall into the milk. If not all the milk is used and the bottle must be
returned to the cool place where it is kept, it should be covered by
means of an inverted drinking glass or, as shown in Fig. 6, by a glass
or porcelain cover. Such covers, or _sanitary milk_ _caps_, as they are
called, are very convenient for this purpose and may be purchased at a
slight cost.

52. Another precaution that should be taken is never to mix stale milk
with fresh milk, because the entire quantity will become sour in the
same length of time as the stale milk would. Also, milk that has been
poured into a pitcher or any other open vessel and allowed to stand
exposed to the air for some time should never be put back into the
bottle with the remaining milk. Such milk is sure to be contaminated
with the germs that are always present in the dust constantly
circulating in the air. It is sometimes necessary to keep milk in a
vessel other than the bottle in which it is delivered. In such an event,
the vessel that is used should be washed thoroughly, boiled in clean
water, and cooled before the milk is poured into it.

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

53. Particular care should be taken of the empty milk bottles. They
should never be used for anything except milk. Before they are returned
to the dairyman to be used again, they should first be rinsed with cold
water, then washed thoroughly with hot, soapy water, and finally rinsed
with hot water. If there is illness in the home, the washed bottles
should be put into a pan of cool water, allowed to come to a boil, and
permitted to boil for a few minutes. Such attention will free the
bottles from any contamination they might have received. The dairyman,
of course, gives the bottles further attention before he uses them
again, but the housewife should do her part by making sure that they are
thoroughly cleansed before they are collected by him.

54. KEEPING MILK COOL IN THE HOME.--As has been pointed out, milk
should, upon being received, be kept in the coolest place available,
which, in the majority of homes at the present time, is the
refrigerator. In making use of the refrigerator for this purpose, the
housewife should put into practice what she learned in _Essentials of
Cookery_, Part 2, concerning the proper placing of food in the
refrigerator, remembering that milk should be placed where it will
remain the coolest and where it is least likely to absorb odors. She
should also bear in mind that the temperature inside of a refrigerator
varies with that of the surrounding air. It is because of this fact that
milk often sours when the temperature is high, as in summer, for
instance, even though it is kept in the refrigerator.

55. In case a refrigerator is not available, it will be necessary to
resort to other means of keeping milk cool. A cool cellar or basement is
an excellent substitute, but if milk is kept in either of these places,
it must be tightly covered. Then, too, the spring house with its stream
of running water is fully as good as a refrigerator And is used
extensively in farming districts. But even though a housewife has none
of these at her disposal, she need not be deprived of fresh milk, for
there are still other ways of keeping milk cool and consequently fresh.
A very simple way in which to keep milk cool is to weight down the
bottles in a vessel that is deeper than they are and then pour cold
water into the vessel until it reaches the top of the bottles, replacing
the water occasionally as it becomes warm. A still better way, however,
so far as convenience and results are concerned, is that illustrated in
Fig. 7. As shown, wrap the bottle in a clean towel or piece of cotton
cloth so that one corner of it is left loose at the top. Then place this
end in a pan of cold water that stands higher than the bottle. Such an
arrangement will keep the cloth wet constantly and by the evaporation of
the water from it will cause the milk to remain cool.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]


COOKING MILK

56. POINTS TO BE OBSERVED IN COOKING MILK.--Because of the nature of
milk and its constituents, the cooking of this liquid is a little more
difficult than would appear at first thought. In fact, heating milk to a
temperature greater than 155 degrees Fahrenheit causes several changes
to occur in it, one of which, the coagulation of the albumin, has
already been mentioned. As the albumin hardens into the layer that
forms on the top of boiled milk, a certain amount of fat, sugar, and
casein becomes entangled in it, and if the coagulated skin is rejected,
these food substances, in addition to the albumin, are lost. Another
change that results from boiling is in the fat globules that remain, for
these separate and exist no longer in the form of cream.

57. When milk that is not perfectly fresh is cooked with other materials
or soups, sauces, and puddings it sometimes curdles. To prevent
curdling, the milk should be heated as rapidly as possible before it is
used with the other ingredients. While the separate heating of the milk
involves a little more work, time may be gained by heating the milk
while the remaining ingredients are being prepared. The curdling of
comparatively fresh milk is often caused by the addition of salt,
especially if the salt is added when the milk is hot. However, if a
pinch of bicarbonate of soda is added to the milk before it is heated,
it will not be likely to curdle even though it is not absolutely fresh.
When tomato is to be used in soup that contains milk or cream, curdling
can be prevented if the milk or the cream to be used is thickened with
flour or corn starch or a little soda is added to the tomato before the
two are mixed. The mixing is accomplished by pouring the _tomato into
the milk_ instead of the milk into the tomato. When acid fruit juices
are to be added to milk or cream and the mixture then frozen, curdling
can be prevented by thoroughly chilling the milk or cream in the freezer
can before combining it with the juices.

58. As has already been learned, great care must be taken in the heating
of milk, because the solids that it contains adhere quickly to the
bottom of the pan and cause the milk to scorch. For this reason, milk
should never be heated directly over the flame unless the intention is
to boil it, and even if it must be boiled every precaution should be
taken to prevent it from burning. It should be remembered, too, that a
very small scorched area will be sufficient to make a quantity of milk
taste burned. The utensil in which milk can be heated in the most
satisfactory way is the double boiler, for the milk does not come in
direct contact with the heat in this utensil. If a double boiler is not
available, good results can be obtained by setting one pan into another
that contains water.

59. Milk is often used in place of water for cooking cereals, beverages,
puddings, soups, etc. This is good practice and should be followed
whenever possible, for when milk is added it serves to increase the
nutritive value of the food. It should be observed, however, that more
time is required to cook grains or cereals in milk than to cook them in
water, because milk contains more solid matter than water and is not
absorbed so quickly. Another frequent use of milk is in breads and
biscuits, where, as is explained in _Bread_ and _Hot Breads_, it
produces a browner and more tender crust than water.

60. VARIETY OF WAYS TO USE MILK IN COOKING.--Because of the numerous
purposes for which milk is required in the preparation of foods, the
smallest amount of it, whether sweet or sour, can be utilized in
cooking; therefore, no milk need ever be wasted. A few of the uses to
which this food is oftenest put are mentioned briefly in order that the
housewife may be familiar enough with them to call them to mind whenever
she desires to carry out a recipe that calls for milk or when she has
occasion to utilize milk that she has on hand.

Milk thickened slightly with flour and flavored with such material as
corn, asparagus, celery, tomatoes, beans, peas, or fish makes a
delicious soup. In bisques, or thickened soups, and in chowders, the
liquid used need not be milk, but these are made very appetizing if milk
is used for part or all of the liquid. Then, too, sauces or gravies made
with milk, thickened with flour, and made rich with butter or other fat
lend themselves to a variety of uses. Dice of vegetables, meat, fish, or
game added to a sauce of this kind and served in pastry cases or over
toast provide dishes that are delightful additions to any meal. Milk is
also used as the basis for custards, blanc manges, ices, sherbets, ice
creams, and tapioca, rice, and bread puddings in which eggs, starchy
materials, and flavorings are added and the mixture then baked, steamed,
boiled, or frozen, as the desired result may require. As is well known,
milk is practically indispensable in the making of cakes, cookies, quick
breads, and in fact nearly all dough mixtures. Even if it has soured, it
can be used with soda to take the place of cream of tartar in mixtures
that are to be made light, the lactic acid in the sour milk acting with
the soda as leavening. Left-over milk in comparatively large quantities
may also be used in the home for the making of cheese, although this
product of milk is usually produced commercially.


RECIPES FOR MILK DISHES AND SAUCES

FOODS CONTAINING MILK

61. From the discussion given up to this point, it will be noted that
milk is used in a large variety of ways and in the making of numerous
dishes. However, most of the dishes in which this liquid occurs involve
other important materials, so that the recipes for them are usually
listed under some other ingredient or division of cookery. For instance,
milk is used in the making of ice cream, but as the ice creams are
included among cold desserts, recipes for them would naturally come in
the Section pertaining to this subject. Milk is also an important
ingredient in puddings, but the recipes for such dishes are given in the
Section in which puddings and their sauces are discussed.

Because of this fact, there are only a few recipes that have milk as
their basis, and this accounts for the small number of recipes here
given. Chief among the recipes that involve principally milk are those
for junket and white sauce, and while the number of these is small and
the use of the dishes not so general as some kinds of food, just as much
attention should be given to them as if they occurred in greater numbers
and were used more commonly. Junket is very easily made and should
therefore cause the housewife no concern; likewise, little difficulty
will be experienced if the directions here given for white sauces are
followed explicitly.


RECIPES FOR JUNKET

62. Plain Junket.--In the stomachs of all animals that use milk as food
is found a digestive ferment known as _rennin_. This is taken from the
stomachs of calves, made up commercially, and sold in the form of
tablets called _junket_. When these tablets are used properly with milk,
they coagulate the milk and make an excellent dessert that resembles
custard and that is very easy to digest. Because of its nature and
qualities, this kind of dessert is used largely for invalids and
children. The following recipe gives the proportion and directions for
making this dessert in its simplest form.

PLAIN JUNKET
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 junket tablet
1 Tb. cold water
1 qt. milk
4 Tb. sugar
1/4 tsp. salt
1/2 tsp. vanilla or other flavoring

Dissolve the junket tablet in the cold water. Warm the milk very slowly
to 100 degrees Fahrenheit, testing the temperature to make sure that it
is right. If a thermometer is not on hand, this can be done by dropping
a drop on the back of the hand. When neither heat nor cold can be felt
from this drop of milk, it may be known to be very near the body
temperature, the temperature at which rennin is active. If temperature
is found to be too high, the milk must be cooled before the tablet is
added. When the desired temperature has been reached, add the sugar, the
alt, the junket dissolved in the water, and the flavoring. Then pour all
into individual molds and keep it where it will remain warm for about 10
minutes, at the end of which it should be firm like a custard and may be
cooled. Keep the junket cool until it is to be served, when it may be
turned out of the mold or served in it. As junket will turn to whey if
it is broken with a spoon to any extent, serving it in the mold is the
better plan.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

63. Junket With. Fruit.--The addition of fruit to junket, as in the dish
illustrated in Fig. 8, makes an attractive dessert for both sick and
well people. If the fruit used is permissible in the diet of an invalid,
its combination with junket adds variety to the diet. In the making of
this dessert, all juice should be carefully drained from the fruit
before the junket is poured over it. Canned or fresh fruits may be used
with equally good results.

JUNKET WITH FRUIT
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 junket tablet
1 Tb. cold water
1 qt. milk
1/4 c. sugar
1/4 tsp. salt
Flavoring
8 halves of canned peaches or
1 c. of berries or small fruit

Make a junket as directed in the preceding recipe. Drain all juice from
the fruit and place a half peach or a spoonful of fruit in the bottom of
each of the eight molds and pour the junket over it to fill the mold.
Let it solidify and serve cold.

64. CHOCOLATE JUNKET.--Chocolate added to plain junket not only varies
the junket dessert, but also adds food value, since chocolate contains a
large quantity of fat that is easily digested by most persons. Where the
flavor of chocolate is found agreeable, such junket may be served in
place of the plain junket.

CHOCOLATE JUNKET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c. milk
2 sq. chocolate
6 Tb. sugar
3/4 c. water
1/4 tsp. salt
1/2 tsp. vanilla
1 junket tablet

Heat the milk to 100 degrees Fahrenheit, testing in the manner explained
in Art. 62. Melt the chocolate in a saucepan, add to it the sugar and 1
cupful of water, and cook until smooth; then cool and add to the warm
milk, putting in the salt, vanilla, and junket tablet dissolved in
cupful of the water. Turn the junket into a dish or into molds and let
stand in a warm place until set; then chill and serve. In preparing this
recipe, it will be well to note that if sweet chocolate is used less
sugar than is specified may be employed.

65. CARAMEL JUNKET.--In the making of caramel junket, browned, or
caramelized, sugar and water take the place of part of the milk, and
while a certain amount of the sugar is reduced in the browning, the
caramel is still very high in food value and adds nutritive material to
the dessert. There is nothing about caramel junket to prevent its being
given to any one able to take plain junket, and if it is made correctly
it has a very delightful flavor.

CARAMEL JUNKET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c.     milk
1/2 c.   sugar
1/2 c.   boiling water
1/4 tsp. salt
1 tsp.   vanilla
1        junket tablet
         Whipped cream
1/4 c.   chopped nuts

Heat the milk to 100 degrees Fahrenheit. Caramelize the sugar by melting
it in a saucepan directly over the flame until it is a light-brown
color; then stir in the boiling water and cook until the caramel and the
water become a sirup, after which cool and add to the milk Add the
salt, the vanilla, and the junket tablet dissolved in a tablespoonful of
cold water Pour the mixture into a dish, let it stand in a warm place
until it sets; then chill, cover with sweetened whipped cream, sprinkle
with chopped nuts, and serve.


RECIPES FOR WHITE SAUCE

66. Three white sauces are commonly used for different purposes, and in
each one of them milk is the basis. These sauces differ from one another
in thickness, and include _thin white sauce_, which is used for cream
toast and soups; _medium white sauce_, which is used for dressing
vegetables and is flavored in various ways to accompany meats, patties,
or croquettes; and _thick white sauce_, which is used to mix with the
materials used for croquettes in order to hold them together. To insure
the best results, the proportion of flour and liquid should be learned
for each kind, and to avoid the formation of lumps the proper method of
mixing should be carefully followed out. A white sauce properly made is
perfectly smooth, and since only little care is needed to produce such a
result it is inexcusable to serve a lumpy sauce. Also, nothing is more
disagreeable than thick, pasty sauce, but this can be avoided by
employing the right proportion of flour and milk. The ingredients and
their proportions for the various kinds of white sauce are as follows:

THIN WHITE SAUCE

1 c. milk
1 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt

MEDIUM WHITE SAUCE

1 c. milk
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt

THICK WHITE SAUCE

1 c. milk
2 Tb. butter
1/4 c. (4 Tb.) flour
1/2 tsp. salt

It will be easy to remember the proportions for these three sauces if it
is observed that each one doubles the previous one in the quantity of
flour used, the thin one having 1 tablespoonful to 1 cupful of milk, the
medium one 2 tablespoonfuls to 1 cupful of milk, and the thick one 4
tablespoonfuls to 1 cupful of milk. To produce these sauces the
ingredients may be combined in three different ways, each of which has
its advantages. These methods, which are here given, should be carefully
observed, for they apply not only to the making of this particular
sauce, but to the combining of fat, starch, and liquid in any sauce.

_Method 1_.--Heat the milk, being careful that it does not scorch. Brown
the butter slightly in a saucepan, add the flour and salt, and stir the
mixture until it is perfectly smooth and has a deep cream color. Then
add the hot milk gradually, stirring to prevent the formation of lumps.
Cook 5 minutes, stirring constantly to prevent the sauce from scorching.
Sauce made according to this method does not require long cooking
because the flour added to the hot fat cooks quickly. In fact, it is a
very desirable method, for the browned butter and the flour lend flavor
to the sauce. Many otherwise unattractive or rather tasteless foods can
be made much more appetizing by the addition of white sauce made in
this way.

_Method 2_.--Put the milk on to heat. While this is heating, stir the
butter, flour, and salt together until they are soft and well mixed;
then add the hot milk to them slowly, stirring constantly. Place over
the heat and finish cooking, or cook in a double boiler. Sauce made by
this method requires longer cooking than the preceding one and it has
less flavor.

_Method 3_.--Heat the milk, reserving a small portion. Stir the flour
smooth with the cold milk and add it to the hot milk, stirring rapidly.
Add the butter and the salt, and continue to stir if cooked over the
heat; if cooked in a double boiler, stir only until the mixture is
completely thickened and then continue to cook for 10 or 15 minutes.
When butter is added to the mixture in this way, it is likely to float
on top, especially if too much is used. A better sauce may be made
according to this method by using thin cream for the liquid and omitting
the butter.


MILK, BUTTER, AND CHEESE (PART 1)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) When milk is used in a meal, what kinds of food may be omitted?

(2) Name the chief uses of milk in the dietary.

(3) Why is it possible for a child to remain in normal condition if
given only milk for a long period of time?

(4) Name the solids contained in milk and tell for what each one is
valuable.

(5) What causes milk to sour?

(6) What are the characteristics of wholesome milk?

(7) What is meant by the adulteration of milk?

(8) What quality of milk is of the most importance to the health of
those using milk?

(9) (_a_) Why is dirty milk dangerous? (_b_) Pour a quart of the milk
you purchase regularly through a pad of cotton. Note the result and
report the condition of the milk by comparing the cotton with the disks
shown in Fig. 2.

(10) Name some of the ways in which milk is likely to become
contaminated.

(11) What is the safest kind of market milk to buy?

(12) Describe the conditions under which milk of this kind is marketed.

(13) (_a_) What is pasteurized milk? (_b_) What is the purpose of
pasteurization?

(14) How may milk be pasteurized in the home?

(15) (_a_) When should milk be sterilized? (_b_) What changes take place
in the sterilization of milk?

(16) What points should be considered in the purchase of milk?

(17) Why is it necessary to give milk considerable care in the home?

(18) Mention the precautions that should be observed in caring for milk.

(19) (_a_) How is milk affected by cooking? (_b_) Describe the best way
to heat milk.

(20) Give the proportions of flour and liquid required in each of the
three varieties of white sauce.

       *       *       *       *       *



BUTTER AND BUTTER SUBSTITUTES (PART 2)

       *       *       *       *       *

BUTTER

1. BUTTER is the fatty constituent of milk. It is obtained by skimming
or separating the cream from milk and churning it in order to make the
particles of fat adhere to one another. Butter is used largely in the
household as an article of food, for it is one of the most appetizing
and digestible forms of fat.

To supply the demand for butter, it is produced domestically in the home
and on farms and commercially in dairies and large establishments. The
principle of all churns used for butter making is practically the same.
They simply agitate the cream so that the butter-fat globules in it are
brought together in masses of such size as to enable the butter maker to
separate them from the buttermilk. Butter is seasoned, or salted, to
give it a desirable flavor and to improve its keeping qualities; it is
washed, or worked, in order to distribute the salt evenly, to separate
from it as much of the curd and other non-fatty constituents of the
cream as can be conveniently removed, to bring it into a compact, waxy
mass, and to give it texture. The United States authorities have set a
standard for the composition of butter, which allows this product to
contain not more than 16 per cent. of water and requires it to have at
least 82.5 per cent. of butter fat.

2. ECONOMICAL USE OF BUTTER.--In the home, butter is used on the table
and in the cooking of many foods. Hardly any article of food has such
general use as this one; in fact, a meal is usually considered to be
incomplete without it, both as an accompaniment to bread, rolls,
biscuits, or whatever variety of these is used, and as an ingredient in
the cooking of some foods that require fat. But butter is not cheap, so
that the wise and economical use of this food in the home is a point
that should not be overlooked by the housewife. This precaution is very
important, it having been determined that butter, as well as other fats,
is wasted to a great extent; and still it is true that no other material
can be so economically utilized. The very smallest amount of any kind of
fat should be carefully saved, for there are numerous uses to which it
can be put. Even though it is mixed with other food, it can always be
melted out, clarified--that is, freed from foreign substances--and then
used for some purpose in cooking. The chief way in which butter is
wasted is in the unnecessary and improper use of it, points that a
little careful thought will do much to remedy.

3. FLAVOR AND COMPOSITION OF BUTTER.--That the housewife may have an
understanding of the food substances found in butter and also learn how
to determine the quantity of butter needed for her family, she should
become familiar with the composition of this food. The flavor of butter
depends to a great extent on the kind of cream from which it is made,
both sweet and sour cream being used for this purpose. Of these two
kinds, sour cream is the preferable one, because it gives to the butter
a desirable flavor. Still, the unsalted butter that is made from sweet
cream is apparently growing in favor, although it is usually more
expensive than salted butter. The difference in price is due to the fact
that unsalted butter spoils readily.

4. So far as its food substances are concerned, butter is composed
largely of fat, but it also contains water, protein in the form of
casein, and mineral matter. The quantity of water contained in butter
determines to a large extent the weight of butter, since water is
heavier than fat; but as only 16 per cent, of water is allowed, butter
that contains more water than this is considered to be adulterated. As
very little milk is retained in butter, only a small percentage of
protein is found in this food. However, a considerable quantity of
mineral salts are present, and these make it more valuable than most of
the other fats. Because of the nature of its composition--a very high
percentage of fat and a low percentage of protein--butter is distinctly
a fuel food, that is, a heat-producing food. Of course, there are
cheaper fats, some of which are even better heat-producing foods than
butter, but as their flavor is not especially agreeable to some persons,
they are not used so extensively.

In view of the nature of the composition of this food, an ounce of
butter a day is the average allowance for each person when the diet of a
family contains meat and such other fats as lard, olive oil, etc. At the
most, 1/2 pound of butter should be purchased each week for each member
of the family for table use, and fats cheaper than butter should be used
for cooking purposes.

5. PURCHASING BUTTER.--As in the case of milk, in order that the
housewife may judge the quality of the butter she purchases, she will do
well to look into the cleanliness and sanitary condition of the dairy
that produces it. Too much attention cannot be given to this matter, for
if cream becomes contaminated from careless handling, the same
contamination is liable to occur in the butter made from it. Butter that
is produced in dairies that make large quantities of it usually has not
much opportunity to become contaminated before it reaches the consumer,
for it is generally pressed into 1-pound prints, and each one of these
is then wrapped and placed in a paper carton. On the other hand, the
farmer and the dairyman doing a small business do not find it profitable
to install the equipment required to put up butter in this way, so they
usually pack their butter into firkins or crocks or make it into rolls.
When such butter goes to market, it is generally placed in a
refrigerator with more butter of the same sort, some of which is good
and some bad. As butter absorbs any strong odor present in the
refrigerator and is perhaps cut and weighed in a most unsanitary manner,
the good becomes contaminated with the bad. While butter of this kind is
perhaps a few cents cheaper than that which is handled in a more
sanitary way, it is less desirable, and if possible should be avoided by
the housewife. In case butter is obtained from a certain farm, the
conditions on that farm should be looked into for the same reason that
the conditions in a dairy are investigated.

6. To be able to select good butter, the housewife should also be
familiar with its characteristics. In color, butter to be good should be
an even yellow, neither too pale nor too bright, and should contain no
streaks. The light streaks that are sometimes found in butter indicate
insufficient working. As to odor, butter should be pleasing and
appetizing, any foreign or strong, disagreeable odor being extremely
objectionable. Stale butter or that which is improperly kept develops
an acid called _butyric acid_, which gives a disagreeable odor and
flavor to butter and often renders it unfit for use.

7. CARE OF BUTTER.--The precautions that the farmer and dairyman are
called on to observe in the making and handling of butter should be
continued by the housewife after she purchases butter for home use. The
chief point for her to remember is that butter should be kept as cold as
possible, because a low temperature prevents it from spoiling, whereas a
high one causes it to become soft and less appetizing. The most
satisfactory place in which to keep butter is the refrigerator, where it
should be placed in the compartment located directly under the ice and
in which the milk is kept, for here it will not come in contact with
foods that might impart their flavors to it. Should no refrigerator be
available, some other means of keeping butter cold must be resorted to,
such as a cool cellar or basement or a window box.

The way in which butter is bought determines to a certain extent the
method of caring for it. If it is bought in paper cartons, it should be
rewrapped and replaced in the carton each time some is cut off for use.
In case it is bought in bulk, it should never be allowed to remain in
the wooden dish in which it is often sold; rather, it should be put into
a crock or a jar that can be tightly covered.

8. Attention should also be given to butter that is cut from the supply
for the table or for cooking purposes and that is not entirely used.
Such butter should never be returned to the original supply, but should
be kept in a separate receptacle and used for cooking. If it contains
foreign material, it can be clarified by allowing it to stand after it
has melted until this has settled and then dipping or pouring the clear
fat from the top. Butter that has become rancid or has developed a bad
flavor need not be wasted either, for it can be made ready for use in
cooking simply by pouring boiling water over it, allowing it to cool,
and then removing the layer of fat that comes to the top. Such butter,
of course, cannot be used for serving on the table. Still, consideration
on the part of the housewife to just such matters as these will prevent
much of the waste that prevails in the household in the use of
this food.

9. COOKING WITH BUTTER.--While some housewives make it a practice to use
butter in cooking of all kinds, there are uses in which other fats are
preferable; or, in case butter is desired, there are certain points to
be observed in its use. For instance, butter is rendered less digestible
by cooking it at a high temperature, as in frying or sautéing; also, it
cannot be used to any extent for the frying of foods, as it burns very
readily. If it is used for sautéing, the dish is made much more
expensive than is necessary, so that in most cases a cheaper fat should
be employed for this purpose. In addition, a point to remember is that
this fat should not be used to grease the pans in which cakes and hot
breads are baked unless it is first melted, because the milk contained
in the butter burns easily; after it is melted, only the top fat should
be used. When butter is desired for very rich cakes and for pastry, it
is usually washed in cold water to remove the milk. To neutralize the
sour milk contained in butter that is used for baking purposes, a little
soda is sometimes employed.

Further economy can be exercised in the use of butter if a little
thought is given to the matter. For instance, when butter is melted and
poured over meat or fish that has been broiled or over vegetables that
have been cooked in a plain way, much of it usually remains in the dish
and is wasted. Such butter can be utilized again. Since butter undergoes
a change when it is cooked, it should be mixed with cooked foods to
flavor them, rather than be subjected to the temperature necessary
for cooking.

When butter is used for spreading sandwiches, it usually will be found
advisable to soften the butter by creaming it with a spoon, but it
should never be melted for this purpose.

10. SERVING BUTTER.--When butter is used for the table, some
consideration must be given to the serving of it. Probably the most
usual way of serving butter is to place a slice of it on a plate and
then pass the plate with a knife to each person at the table. The
advantage of this method is that each person can take the amount desired
and thus prevent waste. However, a still more desirable way of serving
butter that is to be passed is to cut it into small cubes or squares or
to shape it into small balls and then serve it with a fork or a butter
knife. To prevent the pieces or balls of butter from melting in warm
weather, cracked ice may be placed on the butter dish with them. Butter
cut into cubes or squares may also be served on an individual butter
dish or an individual bread-and-butter plate placed at each person's
place before the meal is served. Whichever plan is adopted, any
fragments of butter that remain on the plates after a meal should be
gathered up and used for cooking purposes.

[Illustration: FIG 1]

11. Butter that comes in pound prints lends itself readily to the
cutting of small cubes or squares for serving. Such butter may be cut by
drawing a string through the print or by using a knife whose cutting
edge is covered with paper, a small piece of the oiled paper such as
that in which the butter is wrapped answering very well for
this purpose.

If butter balls are desired for serving, they may be rolled with butter
paddles in the manner shown in Fig. 1. To make butter balls, put wads of
the butter to be used into ice water so as to make them hard. Then place
each wad between the paddles, as shown, and give the paddles a circular
motion. After a little practice, it will be a simple matter to make
butter balls that will add to the attractiveness of any meal. Paddles
made especially for this purpose can be purchased in all stores that
sell kitchen utensils.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

12. Sometimes, for practical purposes, it is desired to know the
quantity of butter that is served to each person. In the case of print
butter, this is a simple matter to determine. As shown in Fig. 2, first
mark the pound print in the center in order to divide it in half; after
cutting it into two pieces, cut each half into two, and finally each
fourth into two. With the pound print cut into eight pieces, divide and
cut each eighth into four pieces. As there will be thirty-two small
pieces, each one will represent one thirty-second of a pound, or
1/2 ounce.


BUTTER SUBSTITUTES

13. In about the year 1870, through a desire to procure a cheaper
article than butter for the poorer classes of France, came the
manufacture of the first substitute for butter. Since that time the use
of butter substitutes has gradually increased, until at the present time
millions of pounds are consumed every year. A certain amount of
prejudice against their use exists, but much of this is unnecessary for
they are less likely to be contaminated with harmful bacteria than the
poorer qualities of butter. Then, too, they do not spoil so readily, and
for this reason they can be handled with greater convenience
than butter.

14. OLEOMARGARINE.--The best substitute for butter and the one most
largely used is called oleomargarine, which in the United States alone
constitutes about two and 1/2 per cent. of all the fat used as butter.
This fat is called by various other names, such as _margarine,_ and
_butterine_, but oleomargarine is the name by which the United States
authorities recognize the product. It is made by churning fats other
than butter fat with milk or cream until a butterlike consistency is
obtained. Originally, pure beef fat was employed for this purpose, and
while beef fat is used to a great extent at present, lard, cottonseed
oil, coconut oil, and peanut oil are also used. Whatever fats are
selected are churned with milk, cream, and, for the finest grades, a
considerable percentage of the very best pure butter. After they are
churned, the oleomargarine is worked, salted, and packed in the same
manner as butter.

15. The manufacture and sale of butter substitutes are controlled by
laws that, while they do not specify the kind of fat to be used, state
that all mixtures of butter with other fats must be sold as
oleomargarine. They also require that a tax of 10 cents a pound be paid
on all artificially colored oleomargarine; therefore, while coloring
matter is used in some cases, this product is usually sold without
coloring. In such an event, coloring matter is given with each pound of
oleomargarine that is sold. Before using the oleomargarine, this
coloring matter is simply worked into the fat until it is
evenly colored.

16. RENOVATED BUTTER.--Another substitute that is sometimes used to take
the place of the best grades of butter is renovated, or process,
butter. This is obtained by purifying butter that is dirty and rancid
and that contains all sorts of foreign material and then rechurning it
with fresh cream or milk. The purifying process consists in melting the
butter, removing the scum from the top, as well as the buttermilk,
brine, and foreign materials that settle, and then blowing air through
the fat to remove any odors that it might contain. Butter that is thus
purified is replaced on the market, but in some states the authorities
have seen fit to restrict its sale. While such restrictions are without
doubt justifiable, it is possible to buy butter that is more
objectionable than renovated, or process, butter, but that has no
restriction on it.

17. METHOD OF TESTING BUTTER SUBSTITUTES.--Very often oleomargarine and
process butter bear such a close resemblance to genuine butter that it
is almost impossible to detect the difference. However, there is a
simple test by which these substitutes can always be distinguished from
butter, and this should be applied whenever there is any doubt about the
matter. To make this test, place the fat in a tablespoon or a small dish
and heat it directly over the flame until it boils, stirring it
occasionally to assist in the melting. If it is oleomargarine or process
butter, it will sputter noisily and take on a curdled appearance;
whereas, if it is butter, it will melt and even boil without sputtering
although it foams to a certain extent.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHEESE

CHARACTERISTICS AND CARE OF CHEESE

18. ORIGIN, PRODUCTION, AND USE OF CHEESE.--Cheese is a product that is
manufactured from the solids of milk, and it provides a valuable food.
The making of cheese was known in ancient times, it having probably
originated through a desire to utilize an oversupply of milk. When
cheese was first made, the fact that bacteria were present was not
known, nor were the reasons for the spoiling of milk understood; but it
was learned that milk can be kept if most of its water is removed. This
discovery was very important, for it led to various methods of making
cheese and proved that cheese making was a satisfactory and convenient
means of storing nourishment in a form that was not bulky and that would
keep for long periods of time. From a very small beginning, the
different methods of making cheese became popular, until at the present
time more than three hundred varieties are made and their manufacture
forms one of the large industries of the world.

In the United States, nearly all the cheese used up to about 50 years
ago was made on farms, and to a great extent by housewives, but about
that time a factory for the making of this product was started in the
state of New York, and it proved a profitable enterprise. From this
beginning, the business of making cheese commercially in this country
has grown until now cheese is almost entirely a factory-made product, in
the manufacture of which the states of New York and Wisconsin lead.

19. In either the commercial or the home production of cheese, skim milk
with all or part of the cream removed is used for some varieties, while
whole milk is used for others, the composition depending largely on the
kind of milk that is employed. Rennet is added to the milk to coagulate
it, and then the curd, from which nearly all the water is removed, is
allowed to ripen. To produce characteristic odors, flavors, and
consistency, various coloring and flavoring materials, as well as
bacteria, are added to the curd. The action of these bacteria is really
the chief factor in the making of cheese and they are therefore not only
desirable but necessary. Non-desirable bacteria, however, result in the
formation of bad odors, flavors, and gases in the finished product and
these must be carefully guarded against by cheese makers.

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

20. Cheese offers a valuable source of nutriment for the body, because
its food value ranks high. As is shown in Fig. 3, the food value in 1
pound of cheese is equivalent to that in 2 pounds of beef, that in 24
eggs, or that in 4 pounds of fish. The use of cheese, however, is not
nearly so great as its food value warrants, the amount used in the
United States per capita being only about 3-1/2 pounds annually. This is
a condition that should be overcome, for there is a large variety of
ways in which cheese can be used to advantage in the diet. When eaten
raw, it is very appetizing, and when used with soups, sauces, and foods
that have a bland taste, it lends additional flavor and makes an
especially attractive dish. In addition, the fact that it is an
economical food and can be conveniently kept and stored should recommend
its frequent use.

21. COMPOSITION OF CHEESE.--Since cheese is a product of milk, it is
somewhat similar to milk in composition, but the change that occurs in
the formation of cheese causes some differences. Nearly all the water
present in milk is removed during the manufacture of cheese, so that
this product becomes a concentrated food made up of all the nourishment
that milk contains except small amounts of albumin, milk sugar, and
mineral matter. These, because they are in solution in the water, are
lost when the whey is separated from the curd. The food substances that
occur in the largest amounts are fat and protein in the form of casein,
which is the tissue-building material of milk. Cheese made from milk
that contains some cream has in it a greater amount of fat than that
made from completely skimmed milk. Besides these two chief food
substances, cheese contains a small amount of milk sugar, mineral
matter, and water.

22. On account of the large quantity of protein found in cheese, this
food can readily take the place of meat in the diet; in fact, it has
some decided advantages over meat. As has been pointed out, cheese
yields more than twice as much food value as an equal weight of beef.
Then, too, the buying and care of cheese are much simpler matters than
the buying and care of meat. As it does not require the low temperature
that meat requires and does not spoil so readily, it can be bought in
considerable quantity and used as desired without danger of spoiling and
loss. In addition, the use of cheese as food does not require so much
skill in preparation as meat does, nor is there loss of flavor and
nutriment in its preparation, as is often the case with meat.

23. QUALITY OF CHEESE.--Every variety of cheese has its own standard and
quality, some being hard and dry, others moist, and still others very
soft. The difference in quality is due to the way in which the curd is
coagulated, the amount of pressure that is put on it, and the ripening
of the cheese. The holes that often occur in cheese and give it a porous
appearance are formed by gas, which is the product of the growth of
bacteria. A large number of very small holes in cheese indicate that
the milk used to make it was not clean and contained many kinds of
bacteria. This condition could be overcome by the use of absolutely
clean milk; indeed, milk of this kind is as necessary for the production
of good cheese as it is for the making of good butter. Certain cheeses,
such as Limburger and Roquefort, have a typical odor and flavor, the
odor being due to bacteria and the flavor to mold. These are carefully
grown and introduced into the cheese during its manufacture.

24. CARE OF CHEESE.--The very strong odor and flavor that characterize
cheese make it necessary that care be given to cheese in the home in
order to prevent it from coming in contact with other foods and
transmitting its odor and flavor to them. The best place to keep cheese,
particularly the soft varieties, is in the refrigerator, where it should
be placed in a closed receptacle and kept as far as possible from foods
that are easily tainted. It is well to avoid a damp place for the
keeping of cheese, as mold frequently develops on the outside when too
much moisture is present; but in case mold does appear it can be removed
by cutting a thin slice from the side on which it has grown. On the
other hand, cheese that is kept in a dry place becomes hard and dry
unless it is wrapped in oiled paper or a damp cloth. However, such
cheese need not be thrown away, for there are numerous uses,
particularly in cooking, to which it can be put.

       *       *       *       *       *

KINDS OF CHEESE

CLASSIFICATION OF VARIETIES

25. The cheese used in the United States may be included under two
leading classes, namely, _foreign cheese_ and _domestic cheese_. Since
the foreign cheeses are imported, they are more expensive than the
cheeses made here, and should not be bought if cheese is to be used as
an economical article of food. They are valuable chiefly for their
flavor and are generally bought for this reason. The domestic cheeses
can be used in larger quantities, for, besides being less expensive,
they are usually of a milder type and are more easily digested. To
enable the housewife to become familiar with the principal varieties of
each of these classes, a discussion of them, including their names,
characteristics, and, in some cases, their use and the method of
making, is here given. In addition, there are shown in colors, in Fig.
4, a large number of cheeses, together with a print of butter _o_, which
serves to illustrate the irregular surface that is exposed when good
butter is broken apart.


IMPORTED CHEESE

26. Each of the European countries has originated its own peculiar kind
of cheese, which remains representative of a certain people or locality.
The majority of these cheeses have met with so much favor in the United
States that large quantities of them are continually imported. A few of
them have been copied here with success, but others have not been
successfully made. While these are not in such common use as the
domestic cheeses, it is well for every one to know their names and the
characteristics by which they can be identified.

27. ENGLISH CHEESE.--Chief among the kinds of cheeses made in England is
CHEDDAR CHEESE, which is illustrated at _a_, Fig. 4. It is rich,
double-thick cream cheese, ranging from a pale to a dark yellow,
although when uncolored it may be white. Such cheese, when fresh, has a
milk flavor, but when it is well ripened it has a characteristic sharp
taste. New Cheddar cheese is soft, but not waxy, in texture and may
readily be shaved or broken into small pieces; when it is well ripened,
it may be grated. English Cheddar cheese is not unlike AMERICAN CHEDDAR
CHEESE, or, as it is commonly called, _American cream cheese_, which is
shown by _b_. In fact the American variety is made according to the
method used for the English. Owing to its characteristics, flavor, and
abundance, Cheddar cheese, both English and American, is the kind that
is used most extensively in the United States.

ENGLISH DAIRY CHEESE, shown at _d_, is similar to Cheddar cheese,
although it has a reddish color and, on account of the method of
manufacture, it is harder. This kind of cheese lends itself well to
cooking, as it may be easily grated.

CHESHIRE CHEESE, a well-known English variety, is a dry cream cheese
made from whole cow's milk. It is deep yellow or red in color, similar
in flavor to Cheddar cheese, and is used in much the same manner.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

STILTON CHEESE, shown at _m_, is a hard cheese made from cow's milk to
which cream has been added and which is coagulated with rennet. Mold
is introduced into this cheese, so that it resembles Roquefort cheese,
which is shown at _j_.

28. HOLLAND CHEESE.--The variety of cheese shown at _e_, Fig. 4, is
known as EDAM CHEESE. It is a hard rennet cheese of a red color and is
mild in flavor. This kind of cheese is molded into the shape of a ball,
the outside of which is usually dyed red, and will keep for a long
period of time. Edam cheese is one of the important products of the
Netherlands, and while it is seldom used in cookery in the homes of this
country, it is served at the table. Usually a section of the top is cut
off to serve as a lid while the inside is scooped out as needed.
Sometimes, after most of the cheese has been removed, the hollow shell
is stuffed with macaroni or rice that has been cooked and seasoned and
the food then baked in the shell.

29. FRENCH CHEESES.--Among the French cheeses, the variety called
GRUYÈRE CHEESE, which is shown at _f_, Fig. 4, is well liked. It is
usually made of skim milk, has a yellow color and a mild, sweetish
flavor, and contains large holes like those found in Swiss and Emmenthal
cheeses, varieties that are very similar to it. Like these cheeses,
Gruyère cheese may be used in cooking or served without cooking, being
used considerably in the making of sandwiches.

BRIE CHEESE is a French variety of very soft cheese, with a strong
flavor and odor. It is made from whole or partly skimmed cow's milk
coagulated by means of rennet. This kind of cheese is used mostly as an
accompaniment to other foods.

CAMEMBERT CHEESE, which is shown at _h_, is also a soft cheese. It is
made by practically the same process as Brie cheese and is used in the
same way. This cheese has a typical odor. Its rind is thick and dry, but
its center is very soft, being sometimes almost liquid.

NEUFCHÂTEL CHEESE, which is shown at _i_, is a soft rennet cheese made
from cow's milk. It is made at Neufchâtel-en-Bray, France, and not at
Neufchâtel, Switzerland. This variety of cheese is wrapped in tin-foil
and sold in small packages. It is used chiefly for salads, sandwiches,
etc. As it does not keep well after the package is opened, the entire
contents should be used at one time.

ROQUEFORT CHEESE, which is shown at _j_, is a hard, highly flavored
cheese made from sheep's milk coagulated with rennet. It has a marbled
appearance, which is due to a greenish mold that is introduced.
Roquefort cheese is frequently served with crackers at the end of a
meal, and is well liked by many persons.

30. ITALIAN CHEESES.--From Italy is imported a cheese, called PARMESAN
CHEESE, that is used extensively for flavoring soups and macaroni
dishes. This cheese, which is shown at _g_, Fig. 4, is very hard and
granular and, provided it is well made, it will keep for years. Owing to
its characteristics, it may be easily grated. It can be bought by the
pound and grated as it is needed, or it can be secured already grated
in bottles.

GORGONZOLA, another Italian cheese, is shown at _k_. It is not unlike
Roquefort in appearance and in use, but it is made from whole cow's milk
coagulated with rennet. Into this cheese is also introduced a mold that
gives its center a streaked or mottled appearance.

31. SWISS CHEESES.--Possibly the best known cheese imported from
Switzerland is the variety known as SWISS, or SWITZER, CHEESE. This kind
of cheese has different names, depending on the district of Switzerland
in which it is made. Nevertheless all of them are similar and have a
mild, sweet flavor. Swiss cheese may be readily recognized by its pale
yellow color and the presence of large holes, although it resembles
Gruyère cheese very closely.

EMMENTHAL CHEESE is a variety of fairly hard cheese that originated in
Switzerland, but is now made in many other countries. It is similar to
Swiss cheese, being made from whole cow's milk and characterized by
large holes about 3 inches apart.

SAPSAGO CHEESE, shown at _n_, Fig. 4, is a skim-milk cheese made in
Switzerland. It is a very hard cheese, and therefore suitable for
grating. In the process of making this cheese, melilot, a clover-like
herb, is added, and this gives the cheese a green color and a
peculiar flavor.

32. BELGIAN CHEESE.--A cheese that originated in Belgium, but is now
manufactured in other countries, is the variety known as LIMBURG, or
LIMBURGER, CHEESE, cheese, which is shown at _l_, Fig. 4. It is a soft
rennet cheese made from whole cow's milk. It is very strong in taste and
smell, due to putrefactive germs that are added to the milk in its
manufacture.


DOMESTIC CHEESE

33. In the United States, efforts that have been exerted to make cheeses
similar to some of those produced in Europe have to a certain extent
been successful. American cheese makers have succeeded in making
several soft cream cheeses that resemble Neufchâtel, some of which are
spiced or flavored with pimiento, olives, etc. In addition, Limburg and
Swiss cheeses have been successfully manufactured in Wisconsin, and
Brie, Neufchâtel, and Camembert have been copied and are produced in New
York. Pineapple cheese, while of American origin, is really very much
like English Cheddar cheese, except that it is harder. But while these
fancy cheeses are desired by some persons and have a moderately large
sale, the cheese for which there is the most demand in America is the
so-called American Cheddar cheese, which, as has been stated, is made
according to the method used for English Cheddar cheese.

34. AMERICAN CHEDDAR CHEESE.--Since American Cheddar cheese is the kind
that is commonly used in this country, the way in which it is made will
be well to know. The milk used for this kind of cheese is first
inspected as to cleanliness and the extent of fermentation it has
undergone, and when these points are ascertained, it is _ripened_; that
is, allowed to sour to a certain degree of acidity. At this stage,
coloring matter is added, after which the milk is prepared for setting
by bringing it to a certain temperature. With the temperature at the
right point, rennet is added to coagulate the milk, or form the curd.
The milk is then allowed to remain undisturbed until the action of the
rennet is at a certain point, when the curd is cut into little
cube-shaped pieces by drawing two sets of knives through it and thus is
separated from the whey. As soon as the curd is cut, the temperature of
the mass is raised to help make the curd firm and to cause the little
cubes to retain their firmness, and during the entire heating process
the whole mass is stirred constantly to assist in the separation from
the whey. When the curd is sufficiently firm, the whey is removed and
the particles of curd are allowed to adhere and form into a solid mass.
If necessary, the curd is cut again into small pieces to get rid of the
excess whey; but if the curd is too dry, the pieces must be piled up
until they are four or five deep. During this process, which is known as
the _cheddaring_ of the cheese, the curd is treated until it is of the
proper texture to be _milled_, that is, put into a mill and ground into
small pieces. The object of milling the curd is to cut it into pieces
small enough to permit of uniform salting and the further escape of
whey. When the curd has been brought to this point, it is salted and
then pressed into molds. Finally, it is wrapped and cured, or ripened.

35. BRICK CHEESE.--Another American cheese that seems to meet with a
popular demand is brick cheese. This kind of cheese, which is
illustrated at _c_, Fig. 4, gets its name from the fact that it is
pressed into "bricks" under the weight of one or two bricks. It is made
from sweet milk, coagulated with rennet, cut with curd knives, and
heated in the whey to firm it. Brick cheese is mild in flavor and of a
moderately close texture. It is used chiefly as an accompaniment to
other foods.

36. AMERICAN HOME-MADE CHEESE.--The making of Cheddar cheese and brick
cheese is, of course, done commercially, but there is a kind of cheese
that can be made very conveniently in the home. This home-made cheese,
which is generally known as COTTAGE CHEESE, affords an excellent way in
which to utilize left-over sour milk, particularly if a quart or more
can be obtained at one time; smaller quantities can generally be used
for baking purposes.

If properly made, such cheese is very digestible. As it can be seasoned
and served in a variety of ways, it makes a delightful addition to
lunches or other light meals in which a protein dish, such as meat, is
undesirable. Skim milk does very well for this kind of cheese, so that
if the sour milk that is to be used has cream on it, the cream should be
removed before the cheese is made; otherwise, it will remain in the whey
and be lost. In case cream is desired to improve the texture and flavor
of the cheese, it should be added after the cheese is made.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

37. To make cottage cheese, allow a quantity of sour milk to clabber,
that is, become curdled, and then place it on the back of the stove in a
thick vessel, such as a crock, until the whey begins to appear on the
top, turning it occasionally so that it will heat very slowly and
evenly. Do not allow the temperature to rise above 90 degrees
Fahrenheit, or the curd will become tough and dry. Remember that the two
things on which the success of this product depends are the flavor of
the milk used and the proper heating of it. No difficulty will be
encountered in the heating of the milk if a coal or a wood stove is
used, but in case a gas stove must be used, the vessel containing the
milk should be placed in a larger one containing warm water and the milk
should be heated in this manner until the curd and the whey begin to
separate. At this point, pour off all the whey possible, and turn the
curd into a cloth bag or a colander lined with cloth, as shown in Fig.
5, and allow any remaining whey to drip out. If, after the whey is
removed, the curd tastes sour, wash it with warm water and allow it to
drip again. Then season it with salt to suit the taste and, provided
cream is desired, add it at this time, using sweet or sour cream. To
work in the cream, press it into the curd with a spoon until the cheese
is quite smooth.

Cheese made in this way may be flavored with anything desirable. For
instance, chopped pimiento, parsley, olives, or nuts improve the flavor
of the cheese very much and make a very appetizing combination. The dry
curd mixed with any of these makes a delightful salad when it is pressed
into balls, garnished with lettuce, and served with salad dressing.

38. JUNKET COTTAGE CHEESE.--Another variety of cottage cheese can be
prepared by using sweet milk and forming the curd with a junket tablet,
one tablet being required for each quart of milk. To make cheese of this
kind, heat the milk until it is lukewarm, or not over 98 degrees
Fahrenheit, and then add the junket tablet dissolved in cold milk or
water. Keep the milk warm until the curd forms, and then break up the
curd with a spoon and pour the whole mass into a bag or a colander lined
with cloth. When all the whey is drained out, the curd, which will be
sweet, can be seasoned in any desired way or mixed with cream and
served. If more flavor is preferred, the curd may be allowed to sour or
may be mixed with sour cream.

39. BUTTERMILK CREAM CHEESE.--A slight variation from the cottage
cheeses just described is buttermilk cream cheese. This cheese is formed
from the curd of buttermilk, which is finer in texture and not so likely
to become tough as that formed from ordinary sour milk. To prepare
buttermilk cream cheese, warm the buttermilk slowly, being careful not
to allow the temperature to rise beyond 100 degrees Fahrenheit. As the
milk is heated, the curd will form and will gradually sink to the bottom
of the vessel. After this occurs, remove the whey and mix the curd with
a little thick cream. The result will be a mixture having a delightfully
creamy consistency.


SERVING CHEESE

40. Cheese does not lend itself readily to many ways of serving, still
it frequently adds zest to many foods. When grated, it may be passed
with tomato or vegetable soup and sprinkled in to impart an unusual
flavor. In this form it may also be served with macaroni and other
Italian pastes, provided cheese has not been included in the preparation
of such foods. When sliced, little slices may be served nicely with any
kind of pie or pastry and with some puddings, such as steamed fruit
puddings. Thin slices or squares of cheese and crackers served with
coffee after the dessert add a finishing touch to many meals. It will be
well to note that crackers to be served with cheese should always be
crisp. Unless they have just been taken from a fresh package, crackers
can be improved by placing them in a moderate oven for a few minutes
before serving. Also, firm crackers that do not crumble easily are best
to serve with cheese, water crackers being especially desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECIPES FOR CHEESE DISHES

EFFECT OF COOKING ON CHEESE

41. Because cheese is a highly concentrated food, it is generally
considered to be indigestible; but this matter can be remedied by mixing
the cheese with other foods and thus separating it into small particles
that are more readily digested. The way in which this may be done
depends on the nature of the cheese. Any of the dry cheeses or any of
the moist cheeses that have become dry may be grated or broken into
bits, but as it is difficult to treat the moist ones in this way, they
must be brought to a liquid state by means of heat before they can be
added to other foods. The cooking of cheese, however, has an effect on
this food that should be thoroughly understood.

It will be well to note, therefore, that the application of heat to the
form of protein found in cheese causes this food substance to coagulate
and harden, as in the case of the albumen of eggs. In the process of
coagulation, the first effect is the melting of the cheese, and when it
has been brought to this semiliquid state it can be easily combined with
other foods, such as milk, eggs, soups, and sauces. In forming such
combinations, the addition of a small amount of bicarbonate of soda
helps to blend the foods. Another characteristic of cheese that
influences the cooking of it is that the fat it contains melts only at a
low temperature, so that, on the whole, the methods of preparation that
require a low temperature are the best for cooking these foods. However,
a precaution that should be taken whenever cheese is heated is not to
cook it too long, for long cooking makes it hard and leathery in
consistency, and cheese in this state is difficult to digest.


VARIETY OF CHEESE DISHES

42. As has already been learned, cheese lends itself very readily to a
large variety of cooked dishes. For instance, it may be grated and
sprinkled on the top of mashed or creamed potatoes and then browned by
placing the dish in the oven. When it is grated or sliced, it may be
arranged between the layers of macaroni or other food used to make a
scalloped dish. Soups and sauces flavored with cheese are especially
appetizing, a cream sauce of this kind served over toast or rice making
an excellent luncheon dish. Toast or crackers spread with cheese and
placed in the oven just long enough for the cheese to melt are delicious
to serve with a salad course or with tea. To assist in the preparation
of such combinations, as well as other cheese dishes, a number of
recipes are here given. In making up these recipes, it will be well to
note that unless the variety of cheese is stated explicitly, use should
be made of American Cheddar cheese, or, as it is often called, _American
cream cheese_, or _store cheese_. Of course, some similar hard cheese
could be used if desired, but the kind mentioned is recommended for the
sake of economy.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

43. CHEESE BONBONS.--A combination of cheese and nuts in the form of
cheese bonbons, besides being very tasty, is highly nutritious, since
both the cheese and the nuts used in making them are high in food
value. Such bonbons, which are illustrated in Fig. 6, may be served with
a light salad, such as a vegetable or a fruit salad, to add food value
to the dish, or they may be served with wafers to take the place of a
salad, when a small amount of some kind of tart jelly goes nicely with
them. If the dessert for the dinner has been a very light one, these
bonbons may be served with coffee and wafers after the dessert. They may
be made as follows:

CHEESE BONBONS
(Sufficient for Twelve Bonbons)

1 pkg. Neufchâtel or cream cheese
2 Tb. finely chopped pimiento
1/2 tsp. salt
Few grains of paprika
1/3 c. half English-walnut meats

Work the cheese smooth with the pimiento and other seasoning, and if the
mixture is too dry add a little cream. Shape this into small balls,
press each ball flat, and then place a half nut on top of each. If the
pimiento is not desired, it may be omitted.

44. CHEESE SOUFFLÉ.--As a dish that will take the place of meat in a
light meal is often desired, cheese soufflé, which is comparatively high
in food value, finds much favor. This dish contains milk, eggs, and
cheese, as is shown in the accompanying recipe, and so may actually be
considered as a protein dish and used accordingly. Soufflé is served in
the dish in which it is baked, but if it is quite firm and is to be
eaten at once, it may be removed from the ramekin to a plate.

CHEESE SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 Tb. butter
4 Tb. flour
1-1/4 c. milk
3/4 c. grated cheese
Dash of paprika
1/2 tsp. salt
3 eggs

Melt the butter, add the flour, mix well, and then gradually add the
milk, which should be scalded. To this sauce add the cheese, paprika,
and salt. When thoroughly mixed, remove from the fire and add the beaten
yolks of eggs, beating rapidly. Cool and fold in the stiffly beaten
whites of the eggs. Pour into a buttered baking dish or in ramekins and
bake 20 minutes in a slow oven. Serve at once.

45. CHEESE OMELET.--Grated cheese added to an omelet gives it a
delightful flavor. Since such an omelet is a high-protein dish, it
should never be served in the same meal in which meat, fish, or other
protein foods are served, but should be used as the main dish of a
luncheon or a light supper.

CHEESE OMELET
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

4 eggs
4 Tb. hot water
1/2 tsp. salt
2 Tb. bread crumbs
1 c. grated cheese
1 Tb. butter

Beat the egg yolks thoroughly and add to them the hot water, salt,
crumbs, and cheese. Beat the egg whites until stiff, but not dry, and
fold them carefully into the yolk mixture. Heat the butter in an omelet
pan. Pour in the mixture, brown very slowly over the heat, and then
place in the oven to cook the top. Serve at once.

46. CHEESE SAUCE.--To give a distinctive flavor to white sauce, cheese
is often added to it. A sauce flavored in this way lends itself nicely
to the garnishing of croquettes or soufflés, and it will be found quite
tasty if it is served over some vegetables, such as steamed cauliflower,
mashed potatoes, or rice served as a vegetable. Such sauce may also be
served over toast to make an attractive luncheon dish.

CHEESE SAUCE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. milk
4 Tb. flour
4 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. paprika
1/2 c. grated cheese

Make a white sauce of the milk, flour, butter, salt, and paprika, and to
it add the grated cheese. If desired, a dash of catsup or chili sauce
may be added for flavoring.

47. CHEESE TOAST.--When toast has added to it eggs, milk, and cheese, as
in the recipe here given, it is sufficiently high in protein to serve as
a meat substitute and is a particularly good dish for a light meal. It
combines well with a vegetable salad for luncheon and is an excellent
dish to serve for Sunday night supper, when very little else need be
served with it.

CHEESE TOAST
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. milk
4 Tb. flour
4 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
3/4 c. grated cheese
2 hard-cooked eggs
6 squares of toast

Make a white sauce of the milk, flour, butter, and salt, and to it add
1/2 cupful of the grated cheese and the egg whites chopped fine. Arrange
the toast on a platter, pour the sauce over it, sprinkle the top with
the egg yolks that have been run through a ricer or a sieve, and
sprinkle the remaining 1/4 cupful of cheese over all. Place in hot oven
or under a broiler until the cheese melts a little. Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]

48. WELSH RAREBIT.--Whenever a dish that can be made in a chafing dish
is desired, Welsh rarebit is immediately thought of. This is possibly
due to the fact that this tasty cheese dish is very often served at
evening parties, when a crowd may gather around a table and enjoy the
preparation of this food in the chafing dish. This kind of cooking
utensil, together with its outfit, which consists of a long-handled
spoon and fork, is shown in Fig. 7. As will be observed, a chafing dish
consists of a frame to which is attached a lamp that provides the heat,
a pan in which water is placed, another pan with a handle in which the
food is cooked, and a cover. The heat for cooking is furnished by
alcohol, although it is possible to get chafing dishes that are heated
by electricity. Chafing dishes are used by many housewives, for in
addition to the use mentioned, they serve very well for the making of
practically any kind of creamed dish, including those in which sea foods
and vegetables are used, as well as for the sautéing of foods. It should
not be understood, however, that Welsh rarebit must be made in a chafing
dish, for this food can be prepared as well in a heavy frying pan or a
double boiler; nor should it be taken for granted that it is served only
at parties, for it may be served as the main dish for luncheon or
supper. Rarebit is often flavored with ale or beer, but this is not
required to make an appetizing dish, as the following recipe shows.

WELSH RAREBIT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
1 c. milk
1/4 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. paprika
1/2 lb. cheese cut into small pieces
6 slices of toast or 6 wafers

Melt the butter, add to it the flour, and stir until smooth. Gradually
add the milk, and cook for a few minutes; then add the salt, paprika,
and cheese, stirring until the cheese is melted. The finished rarebit
should not be stringy. Pour over the toast or wafers and serve.

49. ENGLISH MONKEY.--Another cheese dish that is frequently made in a
chafing dish and served from it is English monkey, but this may likewise
be made with ordinary kitchen utensils and served directly on plates
from the kitchen or from a bowl on the table. A dish of this kind is
most satisfactory if it is served as soon as the sauce is poured over
toast or wafers and before they have had time to become soaked. English
monkey may be made according to the following recipe and served for the
same purposes as Welsh rarebit.

ENGLISH MONKEY
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. bread crumbs
1 c. milk
1 Tb. butter
1/2 c. soft cheese cut into small pieces
1 egg
1/2 tsp. salt
6 buttered wafers

Soak the bread crumbs in the milk. Melt the butter and add to it the
cheese, stirring until the cheese is melted. Then add the soaked crumbs,
the slightly beaten egg, and the salt. Cook for a few minutes and pour
over wafers and serve. If desired, toast may be used in place of
the wafers.

50. CHEESE-AND-MACARONI LOAF.--Macaroni combined with cheese makes a
high-protein dish that very readily takes the place of meat and that may
be served as the main dish in a dinner. If this combination is made into
a loaf and baked well in an oblong bread pan, it may be turned out on a
platter and cut into slices. In case a loaf is not desired, it may be
baked in a baking dish and served directly from that. In either form,
it is made more appetizing by the addition of a tomato sauce.

CHEESE-AND-MACARONI LOAF
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1/2 c. macaroni (inch lengths)
1 c. milk
1 c. bread crumbs
2 Tb. chopped green peppers
1 Tb. chopped onion
1 Tb. chopped parsley
2 eggs
2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 c. grated cheese
1 Tb. butter

Cook the macaroni according to the directions given in _Cereals_. When
it is thoroughly soft, drain off the water and mix the macaroni with the
milk, bread crumbs, green pepper, onion, parsley, well-beaten egg, salt,
pepper, and grated cheese. Place in a baking dish, dot the top with
butter, and bake in a moderate oven until the mixture is set. Serve with
or without sauce, as desired.

51. CHEESE FONDUE.--A dish that is very similar to cheese soufflé and
that must be served as soon as it comes from the oven in order to avoid
shrinking is cheese fondue. It satisfactorily takes the place of meat in
a light meal, and may be served from a large dish or from individual
baking dishes with or without sauce, as desired.

CHEESE FONDUE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 1/2 c. soft bread crumbs
1 1/2 c. grated cheese
1 c. hot milk
4 eggs
1/2 tsp. salt

Mix the bread crumbs and cheese, and add them to the hot milk, beaten
egg yolks, and salt. Fold in the stiffly beaten egg whites. Bake in a
buttered baking dish for about 30 minutes in a moderate oven. Serve
at once.

52. CHEESE DREAMS.--If something delicious to serve with fruit or salad
is desired for luncheon or Sunday night supper, the accompanying recipe
for cheese dreams should be tried. They should be served at once on
being taken from the stove, because as soon as they cool the cheese
hardens and they are not appetizing. Cheese dreams may be sautéd or
prepared in a broiler or an oven, but if they are sautéd, they may be
made in a chafing dish.

CHEESE DREAMS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

12 thinly cut slices of bread
Butter
Cheese sliced 1/8 in. thick

Spread the bread thinly with butter and make sandwiches by placing a
slice of cheese between two slices of bread. Place these sandwiches
under a broiler or in a very hot oven and toast them on both sides, or
omit the butter from the center, place the sandwiches in a slightly
oiled frying pan, and brown them on both sides. In heating the
sandwiches, the cheese melts. Serve hot.

53. CHEESE WAFERS.--If made daintily, cheese wafers may be served with
salad or with tea for afternoon tea. The wafers selected for this
purpose should be small and the layer of cheese not very thick. If a
very thin broth is served at the beginning of a meal, cheese wafers may
accompany it, but they should never be served with a heavy soup.

CHEESE WAFERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 doz. wafers
Butter
3/4 grated cheese
Paprika

Spread the wafers thinly with butter and sprinkle each with 1
tablespoonful of grated cheese and a pinch of paprika. Bake in a hot
oven until the cheese is melted. Cool and serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

54. CHEESE STRAWS.--Nothing can be more delightful to serve with a
vegetable salad than cheese straws, which are illustrated in Fig. 8. An
attractive way to serve them is to slip them through small rings made
out of strips of the dough mixture and baked at the same time the straws
are baked and then place them at the side of the salad plate. They may
accompany a fruit salad, as well as a vegetable salad, but they are not
appropriate for serving with a meat or a fish salad.

CHEESE STRAWS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 Tb. butter
2/3 c. flour
1 c. bread crumbs
1 c. grated or cut cheese
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
Pinch of Cayenne pepper
1/2 c. milk

Cream the butter and to it add the flour, bread crumbs, cheese, and
seasonings. Mix thoroughly and add the milk. Roll 1/4 inch thick and
then cut 1/4 inch wide and 6 inches long. Bake until brown in a
moderately hot oven.

55. TOMATOES WITH CHEESE STUFFING.--The addition of cheese to the
stuffing used in stuffed tomatoes means added flavor, as well as
nutritive value in the form of protein, the food substance in which the
tomatoes themselves are lacking. The bread crumbs used for the stuffing
supply a large amount of carbohydrate, so that the completed dish,
besides being a very attractive one, contains all the food principles in
fairly large quantities. Stuffed tomatoes may be served as the main dish
in a light meal or as a vegetable dish in a heavy meal.

TOMATOES WITH CHEESE STUFFING
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 tomatoes
1 c. bread crumbs
1 c. grated cheese
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. butter
1/4 c. hot water

Select medium-sized tomatoes and hollow out the centers. Mix the crumbs,
cheese, salt, pepper, butter, and hot water with the pulp from the
centers of the tomatoes. Fill the tomatoes with this stuffing, place in
a pan, and bake in a moderate oven until the tomato can be pierced
easily with a fork. Serve hot.

56. FIGS STUFFED WITH CHEESE.--As cheese is a very concentrated food, it
is often combined with another food to offset this effect. An excellent
combination is formed by stuffing figs with cheese. Figs prepared in
this way will be found to be very attractive and tasty and may be served
in the place of a dessert or a salad, depending on the kind and size of
the meal with which they are used.

FIGS STUFFED WITH CHEESE
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 pkg. Neufchâtel or cream cheese
2 Tb. cream
8 small pulled figs

Work the cheese and cream until soft. Steam the figs for 10 or 15
minutes or until they are soft; then cool them, cut out their stems,
fill their centers with the soft cheese, and serve.

57. CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Very appetizing sandwiches that may be used to
take the place of meat sandwiches or a protein dish at any time are made
with a cheese filling. If these are made very small and dainty, they may
be served with salad in a light meal. The addition of pickles, olives,
and pimiento, which are included in the accompanying recipe, makes the
filling more attractive than the usual plain cheese by producing in it a
variety of tastes. They also add bulk, which is lacking in both the
white bread and the cheese. If desired, graham or whole-wheat bread may
be used in place of white bread.

CHEESE SANDWICHES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1/4 lb. cheese
2 medium-sized pickles
1/2 pimiento
Meat from 1/2 doz. olives
1/4 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. paprika
Bread

Put the cheese, pickles, pimiento, and olives through a food chopper,
and when chopped add the salt and the paprika. If the mixture is not
moist enough to spread, add salad dressing or vinegar until it is of the
right consistency. Mix well and spread on thinly cut, buttered slices
of bread.


LUNCHEON MENU

58. Many of the dishes for which recipes are given in this Section,
particularly those including cheese as one of the ingredients, do very
well for the main dish in a light meal, such as luncheon. In order that
practice may be had in preparing a well-balanced luncheon that includes
a dish of this kind, a luncheon menu is here presented. The cheese
soufflé, which has been selected as the main dish in this menu, should
be made according to the directions already given. Little difficulty
will be experienced in making the other dishes, as recipes for them are
given immediately after the menu. All the recipes are intended for six
persons, so that if more or fewer are to be served, the recipes should
be changed accordingly. This menu is presented with the intention that
it be tried by each student and a report of it then prepared according
to the plan outlined and sent with the work of the Examination
Questions.

MENU

Cream-of-Corn Soup
Cheese Soufflé
Stewed Tomatoes
Sautéd Potatoes
Brown Bread and Butter
Baked Apples
Black Tea


RECIPES

CREAM-OF-CORN SOUP

1 Tb. flour
1 Tb. butter
1 pt. milk
1 c. canned corn
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Make a white sauce of the flour, butter, and milk. Force the corn
through a colander or sieve and add the purée to the white sauce. Season
with the salt and pepper and serve.

SAUTÉD POTATOES

6 medium-sized cooked potatoes
2 Tb. butter
1-1/2 tsp.
salt 1/4 tsp.
pepper

Slice the boiled potatoes thin and put the slices in a frying pan in
which the butter has been melted. Add the salt and pepper. Allow the
potatoes to cook until well browned, turning frequently during the
cooking. Serve hot.

STEWED TOMATOES

1 Tb. butter
1 small onion
6 medium-sized ripe tomatoes or 1 can of tomatoes
1 tsp. salt
2 Tb. sugar
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 Tb. flour

Brown the butter in a saucepan, slice the onion into it, and cook for a
few minutes. Add the tomatoes. If fresh tomatoes are to be used, remove
the skins, cut into pieces, put into the saucepan with a few
tablespoonfuls of water, and cook until the tomatoes are thoroughly
softened. If canned tomatoes are to be used, merely allow them to come
to the boiling point. Add the salt, sugar, and pepper, and, a few
minutes before removing from the fire, moisten the flour with a
tablespoonful of cold water and stir into the tomato. Cook for a few
minutes and serve.

BAKED APPLES

6 medium-sized apples
1 lemon
3/4 c. sugar
1/2 c. water

Wipe and core the apples. Put them into a baking dish and place a slice
of lemon on the top of each. Make a sirup of the sugar and the water,
pour this around the apples, and bake slowly until they can be pierced
easily with a fork. Serve hot or cold, with a teaspoonful of jelly on
the top of each apple.

BLACK TEA

6 tsp. black tea
6 c. boiling water

Scald out the pot with freshly boiling water, pour in the tea, add the 6
cupfuls of freshly boiling water, and allow it to stand on the leaves
until the tea is strong enough to serve. Then either pour the tea off
the leaves and keep it hot or serve at once.


MILK, BUTTER, AND CHEESE (PART 2)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) From what part of milk is butter made?

(2) What food substances does butter contain?

(3) Tell how to select good butter.

(4) After butter is purchased, what care should be given to it?

(5) (_a_) How does cooking affect butter? (_b_) How can economy be
exercised in the use of butter in cooking?

(6) How may rancid butter be made fit for use in cooking?

(7) Explain the advantages of butter substitutes.

(8) Give the test for distinguishing oleomargarine and renovated butter
from butter.

(9) Explain briefly the way in which cheese is produced.

(10) What food substances are found in cheese?

(11) Why can cheese be used to take the place of meat?

(12) Tell the advantages that cheese has over meat.

(13) Explain how to make cottage cheese from sour milk.

(14) Why should cheese be mixed with other foods instead of being served
alone?

(15) Explain the effect of cooking on cheese.


REPORT ON MENU

After trying out the luncheon menu given in the text, send with your
answers to the Examination Questions a report of your success. In making
out your report, simply write the name of the food and describe its
condition by means of the terms specified in the following list:

Cream-of-Corn Soup: too thick? too thin? lumpy? well seasoned? milk
curdled?

Cheese Soufflé: light? heavy? baked sufficiently? shrunken? underdone?

Hash-Browned Potatoes: too brown? not brown enough? well seasoned? too
much fat? too little fat?

Stewed Tomatoes: sufficiently cooked? well seasoned? too sour?

Baked Apples: well done? not well done? too brown? too dry? too moist?
sufficient sugar?

Black Tea: too weak? too strong? hot? taste of tannin?

       *       *       *       *       *



EGGS

       *       *       *       *       *

VALUE OF EGGS AS FOOD

DESCRIPTION OF EGGS AND PLACE IN THE DIET

1. Eggs are of great importance in the diet, and to appreciate this fact
fully the true nature of this food must be understood. For domestic use,
the eggs of guinea hens, turkeys, ducks, and geese occasionally find
favor, but as eggs laid by hens are the kind that is commonly used, it
is to such eggs that this Section is devoted. A hen's egg may really be
considered as an undeveloped chicken, because it contains all the
elements required to build the body of the chick and provide it with the
energy it needs to pick its way into the world. When it emerges from the
shell, it is fully developed, and in a short time it begins an
independent existence, seeking and finding its own food. The fact that
eggs store so much nutritive material explains to some extent why they
are a valuable source of food for man and why they are used so
extensively. However, as in the case of milk, the elements that eggs
contain are not in just the right proportion for the sole nourishment of
a human being, so they must generally be used in combination with
other foods.

2. Most persons are familiar with the appearance of eggs, but in order
that satisfactory results may be obtained in their selection, care, and
cooking, it will be necessary to look into the details of their
composition. As is well known, an egg consists of a porous shell lined
with a fine, but tough, membrane that encloses the white and the yolk
and serves to protect them. The yolk is divided from the white by a
delicate membrane, which permits it to be separated from the white when
an egg is carefully broken. This membrane extends to each end of the
shell in the form of a small cord, and it is so fastened to the shell as
to hold the yolk evenly suspended. The porous nature of an egg shell is
required to give air to the developing chick, but it is this
characteristic that permits eggs to spoil as they grow old and are
exposed to air, for through these minute pores, or openings, the water
in the egg evaporates and air and bacteria enter. Of course, as the
water evaporates and is replaced by air, the egg becomes lighter.
Because of this fact, the freshness of eggs can be determined by placing
them in water. When they are fresh, they will sink in cold water, but as
they decompose they become lighter and will float.

Since it is known that the spoiling of eggs is due to the entrance of
air through the porous shell, it may be inferred that their decay may be
prevented either by protecting the shell so that air cannot enter or by
keeping the eggs at so low a temperature that bacteria cannot grow.
Although stored eggs always deteriorate more or less, both of these
methods of preservation have proved very satisfactory, the former being
used largely in the home and the latter finding its solution in cold
storage. A knowledge of how eggs can be preserved, however, is of great
value, for if there were no means of preservation and eventual
marketing, the price of eggs would at times rise to actual
prohibitive limits.

3. That eggs as an article of food are growing in importance is
indicated by the fact that their production has come to be a large and
widely distributed industry. Owing to the private consumption and sale
of eggs, an accurate statement of the number of eggs produced is
difficult to give. Still, in a report, the United States Bureau of
Agriculture estimated the value of the yearly egg production at
something more than three million dollars, with an allowance of about
210 eggs, or 17-1/2 dozen, per capita each year, or 4 eggs a week for
each person. These figures, however, are only suggestive of the
production, use, and value of eggs, for as the population increases so
does the use of eggs. In fact, they are proving to be almost
indispensable to the cook, the baker, the manufacturers of certain
foods, and many others.

4. With the increase in the demand for eggs has come a corresponding
steady advance in the money value of this product and, consequently, an
increase in its price. The housewife who would practice economy in
cookery can readily see, therefore, that with reference to the number of
eggs required and the ways in which they are used, she must choose
carefully the recipes and methods she employs. If the eggs are always
considered a part of a meal, their use is seldom an extravagance, even
at such high prices as they sometimes attain. On the other hand, if a
dessert that requires the use of many eggs is added to a meal that is
itself sufficient in food value, it is not unreasonable to regard such
use of eggs as an extravagance. A point that should be taken into
consideration in the use of eggs in the diet, especially when their
price seems very high, is that there is no waste matter in them, unless
the shell is regarded as waste. Therefore, they are often more
economical than other foods that can be bought for less money.

It must not be understood, however, that eggs are used only as an
article of diet. They are also a very important food ingredient, being
employed in the preparation of many kinds of dishes. For instance, they
are often used to thicken custards, sauces, etc.; to clarify soups and
jellies; to lighten cakes, puddings, hot breads, and other baked
mixtures; to form the basis for salad dressings; and to combine or hold
together many varieties of food.


NUTRITIVE VALUE OF EGGS

5. Like milk, eggs are often spoken of as a perfect food. Still, as has
been pointed out, they are not a perfect food for man, but they are of
especial nutritive value and should be used freely in the diet just as
long as their cost neither limits nor prohibits their use. An idea of
how they compare with other nutritious foods can be obtained from Fig.
1, which shows that eight eggs are equal in food value to 1 quart of
milk or 1 pound and 5 ounces of beefsteak. A better understanding of
their food value, however, can be gained from a study of their
composition.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

6. Since an egg is an undeveloped chick that requires only the addition
of warmth to develop it into a living, moving creature made of muscles,
bones, and blood, it is evident that this food contains considerable
tissue-building and energy-producing material. The exact proportion of
this material, as well as the other substances found in eggs, is given
in the food chart shown in _Essentials of Cookery_, Part 1. The chart
relating to the composition of eggs points out that the edible portion
of the whole egg consists of 73.7 per cent. of water, 14.8 per cent. of
protein, 10.5 per cent. of fat, and about 1 per cent. of ash, or mineral
matter. The protein, which is chiefly in the form of albumen, and the
fat are the most digestible of these elements, while the mineral
constituents are as valuable for the growing child as for the chick.
When the total weight of an egg is taken into consideration, the shell
constitutes about 11 per cent., the yolk 32 per cent., and the white 57
per cent. The composition of the yolk and the white differs somewhat,
the yolk having the greater food value, a fact that is also clearly
indicated in the chart. The white contains a larger proportion of water
than the yolk, but the yolk contains the most of the fat and more
protein and mineral matter, or ash, than the white. In addition, the
chart shows that the number of calories to the pound of whole egg is
700, of egg yolk is 1,608, and of egg white is 265.

7. PROTEIN IN EGGS.--The nature of the food substances in eggs is of
nearly as great importance as their amount, for they not only determine
the value of this food in the body, but influence its cooking. That
protein is present in both the yolk and the white is apparent from the
fact that they coagulate when heat is applied. Because eggs are high in
protein, containing 14.8 per cent. of this substance, they may be
regarded as equivalent to a meat dish, and it is only when they are
extremely high in price that they cannot be frequently substituted for
meat to advantage. They are often used to take the place of milk, too,
for eggs and milk are more alike in nutritive value than any other two
protein foods; but, of the two, milk yields the cheaper form of protein.
Like meat and milk, eggs are rich in all those food materials which
enter into the construction of bone, muscle, and blood.

8. FAT IN EGGS.--A study of the food chart previously mentioned will
show that eggs contain proportionately almost as much fat as protein and
that nearly all this fat is found in the yolk. Since fat produces more
heat or energy, weight for weight, than any other food substance, and
since eggs contain neither starch nor sugar, it is evident that the fat
of this food is the main source of the energy-producing material. Fat in
eggs occurs in the form of an emulsion, or tiny particles, and, like the
fat of milk, is very readily digested. It is for this reason that both
of these foods are particularly well adapted to the diet of both
children and adults. The presence of quantities of protein and fat and
the absence of carbohydrate in eggs indicate that the proper thing to
combine with this food, in order to have a well-balanced meal when eggs
are eaten, is carbohydrate in some form.

9. MINERALS IN EGGS.--Eggs are especially valuable for the mineral salts
they contain, chief among which are lime, phosphorus, sulphur, iron,
potassium, and sodium. For this reason, the addition of eggs to any kind
of diet supplies a large amount of the minerals that are needed for
bone, blood, and tissue building. A favorable point concerning the
minerals found in eggs is that they are not affected to any extent by
cooking. Therefore, in the preparation of any dish, if eggs are added to
other foods, that dish will contain an additional amount of mineral
salts, plus the nutritive value of the eggs.

10. DIGESTIBILITY OF EGGS.--In connection with the discussion of the
food substances of which eggs are composed, it will be well to note how
these affect the digestibility of this food. But just what is meant by
this characteristic with reference to eggs must first be understood. In
some foods, digestibility may mean the length of time required for them
to digest; in others, the completeness of the digestion; and in still
others, the ease and comfort with which the process of digestion
proceeds. In the case of eggs, digestibility refers to the quantity of
this food that is absorbed, that is, actually dissolved and permitted to
enter the blood stream. The nutritive value of eggs is not so high as
would naturally be supposed, for, although the protein, fat, and mineral
salts of an egg make up about one-fourth of its contents, one egg equals
in nutritive value only 1/2 cupful of milk, a small potato, or a
medium-sized apple. However, when the proportion of the nutritive
material that the body retains from this food, or its digestibility, is
considered, eggs rank extremely high, it having been determined by
experiments that 97 per cent. of the protein and 95 per cent. of the fat
are assimilated. A point worthy of note in this connection, though, is
that eggs contain no cellulose, such as that found in grains,
vegetables, and fruits. Therefore, in order to add the much-needed bulk
to the diet, foods that do contain cellulose should be served with eggs.

11. Whether or not the cooking of eggs has any effect on their
digestibility is a matter that has also been investigated. The results
of the experiments made indicate that cooking makes some difference with
the rate of digestion, but very little with its thoroughness. So far as
the rapidity of digestion is concerned, there is very little difference
between raw eggs and slightly cooked eggs; but hard-cooked eggs,
although they may be digested as completely as soft-cooked ones, require
longer time for the accomplishment of the process. This is due to the
fact that the whites of hard-cooked eggs are so firm in texture that,
unless they are finely chopped or thoroughly masticated, the digestive
juices are not able to act on them quickly. As a result, portions of
them may escape digestion or remain in the digestive tract for some time
and decompose. For this reason, hard-cooked eggs are usually excluded
from the diet of children and invalids, and even healthy adults should
be careful to masticate them thoroughly.


SELECTION OF EGGS

12. On first thought it would seem as if there is very little to guide
the housewife in the selection of eggs, it being extremely difficult to
tell from their external appearance whether or not they are fresh or
stale. As a rule, she must trust largely to the honesty of the person
from whom she buys eggs. Still she need not depend entirely on the
dealer's word, for, at least to a certain extent, there are ways in
which she may judge the quality of eggs. Because of the great value of
eggs as a food and for cooking purposes, it is important that the
housewife make use of all available information on this matter and, in
addition, become familiar with the trade practices in the egg industry.

13. MARKETING OF EGGS.--As is generally known, hens lay a large number
of eggs in the spring of the year, but they do not lay readily in the
cold winter months; and not alone are the greatest quantities of eggs
produced in April and May, but those laid at this time are of the best
quality. Because of this condition and in order that the demand during
the time of scarcity may be supplied, it is necessary that a
considerable number of eggs be preserved when they are comparatively
cheap and abundant. Also, in the preserving of eggs for future use, it
is of the greatest importance that they be kept in the best possible
condition and manner, so that when they are used, months after they are
laid, they may be as good as it is possible to have them.

The advance made in storage and transportation methods in recent years
has done much toward making the egg supply uniform all the year around.
Not long ago, because of inadequate means of storage and shipping, eggs
were sold only a short distance from the place where they were produced.
However, with the coming of cold storage and improved methods of
shipping, eggs have been changed from a perishable and more or less
seasonable food to a staple one. Now it is possible to collect them in
large quantities, to keep them for a considerable time before selling
them, and to ship them long distances. To safeguard the public, though,
authorities have set a time limit for the storage of eggs, the legal
time they may be kept being 8 months. By this is meant that eggs placed
in the warehouse in May must be released or sold in December; whereas,
those stored in June must be released no later than January.

14. Eggs that have been kept too long in storage are characterized by a
musty odor and flavor, the breaking of the yolk and its mixing with the
white, and a watery condition of the white. Such eggs, of course, cannot
be sold legally. Those which may be placed on the market are graded
according to their freshness, cleanliness, size, cracks, and color. With
the exception of their freshness, these points can be readily told from
the appearance of the eggs; but, in order to determine whether an egg is
fresh or not, it is generally put through a process known as _candling_,
by which the interior condition of the egg can be ascertained.

In the grading of eggs, all those of the best size, color, and condition
are sold under a particular trade name and bring a high or a low price,
according to the grading. Others that are not so perfect are put in
another grade and sell for prices that vary according to the demand.
Eggs, of course, differ in appearance and in many cases they are sorted
in order to satisfy the demand. For instance, in some localities, eggs
having a brown shell sell for the highest price, while in other places,
eggs having a white shell are in the greatest demand and bring the
highest price. Unsorted eggs are not held in much favor and do not
bring so good a price as those which are all one color. Many persons
have an idea that the color of the shell of an egg bears some relation
to its nutritive value and flavor. However, authorities on foods agree
that, other things being alike, the edible portion of white-shelled eggs
has essentially the same composition and nutritive value as that of
dark-shelled eggs.

15. QUALITY OF EGGS.--The natural quality of eggs depends largely on the
food of the hens and their conditions of living. Because of this fact,
the selection, breeding, and care of fowls have developed into a
science, particularly since the production of eggs has grown into an
industry. When the quality itself is to be determined, all the
characteristics of eggs must be taken into consideration; still there is
one particular point on which the quality of eggs depends, and that is
their freshness. Various agencies, however, are constantly at work to
render this quality inferior. Chief among these are the molds and
bacteria that pass through the porous shells of eggs that have been
improperly cared for or have become contaminated by being allowed to
remain in unclean surroundings. Such bacteria are responsible for the
unpleasant flavors that are found in bad eggs. Because of their harmful
effect, every effort should be made to prevent the entrance of the germs
that cause decay, and, as has been stated, the best way in which to
accomplish this is to protect the shell. If it is found that bacteria
have entered, the eggs will become unfit for use quickly unless their
growth is prevented. This may be done by storing the eggs at a
temperature that will keep the bacteria dormant, or inert.

16. If the eggs are kept under the proper conditions, they will not
actually spoil for a long time; but it is seldom that they are not more
or less affected by storage of any kind that covers a period of several
months. One change that can always be looked for in such eggs is in the
air space at the broad end. When an egg is first laid, this air space is
small, but since the water contained in the egg slowly evaporates
through the porous shell it increases in size as the egg grows staler.
For this reason, the freshness of an egg can often be determined by the
size of this air space.

In addition, the purposes for which eggs are used are somewhat affected
by their storage. A stale egg, although it may not be actually spoiled
to the extent that it cannot be used as food, will not produce such good
results in a cooking process as a fresh egg, especially if it is used
for leavening. In fact, it is impossible to produce the desired results
with eggs that have undergone a certain amount of change, even though
their odor and their flavor do not indicate that they are spoiled.

17. JUDGING THE QUALITY OF EGGS IN THE MARKET.--While, as has been
mentioned, the housewife must depend considerably on the dealer's word
as to the freshness of the eggs she purchases, it will be well for her
to be familiar with the trade names of eggs and their meaning. The names
used differ, of course, in various localities, but all large
distributors grade and name eggs in much the same way. In deciding on
the grade to which eggs belong, a certain number of points are given for
color, size, freshness, and appearance, and the sum total of these
points determines the grade, a special name being given for each grade.
For instance, eggs that can be graded 90 are called _extra fancy_; those
which receive a grade of 80, _fancy_; those which are graded 70,
_strictly fresh_; and those which can be graded only 60, _cooking eggs_.
When eggs are put on the market under such names, it can be expected
that the quality will correspond to the grade and the price will vary
with the grade. Therefore, the trade name and the price are two of the
principal ways in which the quality of eggs in the market may be judged.

18. Another way of judging the quality of eggs consists in observing the
condition of the surface of the shell. When eggs are freshly laid, the
shell is covered with a substance, called _bloom_, that gives it a
feeling much like that of a thin lime coating deposited in a pan after
water boils. This coating disappears gradually as the egg is exposed to
the air, but as long as it remains, the egg may be considered as fresh
and germ-proof. While this way of determining freshness is probably the
quickest, it is possible that the quality of some eggs from which the
bloom has recently disappeared has not been injured.

19. When eggs are selected in the market, certain points in their
appearance should also be noted. If eggs of the best quality are
desired, medium-sized ones that are uniform in size and color should be
selected. With regard to shape, they should have a comparatively long
oval shell, one end of which is blunt and the other, a sharp curve.

[Illustration: FIG. 2: Internal structure of egg.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3: FRESH, 3 WEEKS, 3 MONTHS, OLDER.]

20. JUDGING THE QUALITY OF EGGS IN THE HOME.--After eggs have been
received in the home, several simple tests for determining their
freshness can be applied in addition to the ones already mentioned. A
rather indefinite test, but one that is sometimes applied to determine
the freshness of an egg, is to shake it. However, to be able to carry
out this test successfully, it is well to understand the interior
structure of an egg. Fig. 2 illustrates this clearly. At _a_ is shown
the air space previously mentioned; at _b_, the spiral cords that run
from the yolk to each end of the egg and hold the yolk in place; at _c_,
the yolk; and at _d_, the white. When the water inside the shell
evaporates, the yolk and white shrink so much that they can be felt
moving from side to side when the egg is shaken. The staler the egg, the
more pronounced does the movement become. This method should be applied
only immediately before the egg is to be used, as the thin membrane
between the yolk and the white and the spiral cords that hold up the
yolk are liable to be disturbed by the shaking. If they are broken, the
yolk will settle and finally adhere to the shell in case the egg is
stored for any length of time after that.

[Illustration: FIG. 4: Testing the egg.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5: four eggs.]

21. If nothing has been done to preserve eggs, the simple test for
freshness illustrated in Fig. 3, which consists in placing the eggs in a
glass containing water, will be found effective. A perfectly fresh egg
will sink when it is put into the water, but if the egg is 3 weeks old
the broad end will rise slightly from the bottom of the glass. An egg
that is 3 months old will sink into water until only a slight portion of
the shell remains exposed; whereas, if the egg is older or stale, it
will rise in the water until nearly half of it is exposed.  22. The
test known as candling, which is usually applied to eggs before they are
put on the market, can also be practiced by the housewife in the home.
This method of determining the freshness of eggs consists in placing a
piece of cardboard containing a hole a little smaller than an egg
between the eye and a light, which may be from a lamp, a gas jet, or an
electric light, and holding the egg in front of the light in the manner
shown in Fig. 4. The rays of light passing through the egg show the
condition of the egg, the size of its air space, and the growth of mold
or the spoiling of the egg by any ordinary means.

[Illustration: FIG. 6 (_a_) (_b_)]

In Fig. 5 is shown how an egg at various stages of freshness appears
when candled. When an egg is fresh, it will appear as in (_a_); that is,
the yolk will be barely distinguishable from the white except as a
slightly darker area in the center of the egg, and the entire egg will
appear clear and bright and free from spots. In an egg that is a little
older, candling will reveal a slightly darker yolk, a cloudy white, and
a larger air space, as in (_b_). In a watery egg, or one that is
beginning to spoil, various dark spots and blotches usually develop, as
view (_c_) indicates. When an egg is rotten, the contents of the shell
will look dark in candling and the yolk will appear to be mixed with the
white, as in (_d_).  23. If the housewife does not wish to resort to
candling, she may determine the condition of an egg by breaking it into
a saucer and examining it carefully. If the egg is newly laid, no odor
will be detected and the white will be clear, elastic, and rather thick;
also, where it joins the yolk it will be almost solid. The yolk of such
an egg will have an even yellow color, without lighter or darker spots
and, as shown in Fig. 6 (_a_), will stand up well from the surface of
the white. Sometimes a small spot of blood may be detected on the yolk
of a perfectly fresh egg, but, while this is not pleasant to look at, it
does not affect the quality of the egg. When an egg that is not real
fresh is broken into a saucer, the yolk will lie flat, as in (_b_). In
an egg that is quite stale, the membrane surrounding the yolk is easily
destroyed, so that even when such an egg is broken carefully the yolk
and the white are likely to run together.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRESERVATION OF EGGS

CAUSES AND PREVENTION OF DETERIORATION

24. As has been implied in the discussion given thus far, eggs will
deteriorate or spoil in a comparatively short time unless something is
done to preserve them. In view of the eggs she keeps on hand at home, as
well as those she buys, the causes of spoiling and the ways in which to
prevent spoiling are matters with which the housewife should be
familiar, particularly if she would secure for her family eggs of the
best quality at prices that are not beyond her means. The spoiling of
eggs is due to decomposition, which is caused by molds or bacteria that
result from accidental causes, and, in fertile eggs, to the germination
and development of the chick, which is a natural process. The loss of
quality resulting from molds and bacteria in the egg is brought about by
their growth and by the formation of chemical compounds, which give
spoiled eggs their peculiar appearance, taste, and odor. Some of these
molds are not injurious to health, while others may give rise to more or
less serious illness.

25. Various methods have been devised whereby their rapid deterioration
may be prevented, and a knowledge of these is important to those who
have occasion to purchase eggs or to keep them over from the season of
plenty to the season of scarcity. The method followed to prevent losses
due to the development of the embryo consists in the production of
infertile eggs--that is, eggs that are non-productive. This is a point
that is as well worth remembering in the home production of eggs as it
is in professional poultry raising. The method employed to prevent the
infection of eggs by molds and bacteria is to keep them clean and dry
from the time they are laid until they are finally used.

26. While the preservation of eggs is carried on to a greater extent at
present than formerly, the idea is neither new nor original; indeed, it
has been practiced for many years by the people of some foreign
countries. For instance, in some sections of China, duck eggs are
preserved by covering them with a layer of mud, and such eggs are often
kept for a year or more before they are eaten. However, eggs stored in
this way decompose and their odor and flavor disappear before they are
used, so that they must usually be hard boiled before they can be eaten.
Egg preservation such as is practiced in the United States is the
opposite of this and attempts to prevent not only ripening processes and
putrefactive changes but any bacterial or other changes that lessen the
original quality. It will be well to note, however, that eggs preserved
for any length of time deteriorate to some extent and cannot be expected
to be equally as good as fresh eggs.


COMMERCIAL PRESERVATION OF EGGS

27. The usual market method of preserving eggs is by cold storage, an
industry that has developed to vast proportions in recent years. The
success of this method depends on the fact that germs causing
decomposition will not live in a low temperature. While the plan of
storing eggs is responsible for their high price at certain times, it is
also a means of supplying eggs to many persons who would otherwise not
be able to obtain them. The greatest point in favor of this plan,
however, is that it makes possible the marketing of quantities of eggs
during the winter season of scarcity at a price that, although somewhat
high at times, is much more moderate than it would be if it were not
possible to store eggs in large quantities.

28. In order that advantage may be taken of favorable climatic
conditions, eggs are commonly purchased for storage as early in the year
as they are abundant. They are selected with great care, only those
which are clean, sound, and fresh being used. These eggs are packed in
clean cases, and then placed in warehouses where they are kept at a
temperature just above freezing, or one that ranges from 32 to 40
degrees Fahrenheit. In such storage, precaution is usually taken to
prevent the eggs from freezing, for while freezing does not necessarily
injure them for immediate use it breaks the shell because of the
contraction that occurs. While the eggs are in storage, they are also
protected as far as possible from air circulation, as this increases
evaporation and causes the contents of eggs to shrink. To prevent the
yolks from settling to one side, and finally adhering to the shell, the
eggs are turned frequently. The usual limits of storage are from 6 to 9
months, but eggs are not generally allowed to remain in storage more
than 8 months. When taken out at the end of that time, it will be found
that they have deteriorated very little, and while they cannot compete
with the better grades of fresh eggs, they are as desirable as most of
the eggs that can be purchased in the early fall when eggs are not
plentiful.

29. Sometimes eggs are removed from the shells, stored for commercial
use in containers of about 50 pounds each, and kept at the freezing
point until they are to be used. Eggs in this form, which may be bought
with the yolks and whites either mixed or separate, find a ready market
in bakeries and restaurants, where large quantities of eggs are
continually used. Such eggs remain good for any length of time while
they are kept frozen, but they must be used immediately after they are
removed from storage.

30. It is not always necessary to keep eggs at a cold temperature in
order to preserve them, for a method that has proved very satisfactory
is to reduce them to the form of powder by drying them. In this form,
the bulk is greatly reduced, 1 pound of the dry material representing 30
to 40 eggs, and in order to prepare them for use in cooking they must be
mixed with water. POWDERED EGGS, or _desiccated eggs_, as they are
usually called, can be kept for an indefinite length of time without
special care in storage, when they are wholesome and carefully handled.
Tests that have been made show that eggs of this kind give fairly good
results when used in cookery, but they are used principally by bakers,
for they can be obtained more cheaply than fresh eggs, especially when
it is difficult to secure eggs in other forms.

 HOME PRESERVATION OF EGGS

31. The housewife who desires to run her household on an economical
basis will not depend entirely on eggs that are commercially stored, but
will take advantage of one of the many methods by which eggs may be
successfully kept in the home. By being prudent in this matter, she will
be prepared to supply her family with this commodity at times when the
market price is high.

As many as twenty household methods have been tried out for the
preserving of eggs, but each one is based on the theory that decay is
hindered when the shell is covered with some substance that renders it
air-tight and prevents evaporation or the entrance of bacteria and mold.
Among the methods that have met with the most success are burying eggs
in oats, bran, or salt; rubbing them with fat; dipping them in melted
paraffin; covering them with varnish or shellac; and putting them down
in lime water or in a solution of water glass.

No matter which of these methods is adopted, however, it will be well to
note that only eggs laid in April, May, or June should be used for
storage purposes, as these are the best ones laid during the year; also,
that the eggs should always be packed with the small end down, because
the yolk will not settle toward the small end so readily as toward the
large end or the side.

32. Of these various ways of preserving eggs in the home, probably the
oldest method is that of packing the eggs in oats, bran, or salt. This
method is fairly effective, but the eggs preserved by it do not keep so
long as eggs preserved by other methods, nor is their quality so good.
Preserving eggs by completely covering the shells with fat, vaseline,
paraffin, varnish, or other substance that will exclude the air but not
impart flavor to the eggs, proves a more satisfactory method so far as
the eggs are concerned, but it requires more time and handling. To
assist in their preservation, eggs are sometimes immersed in boiling
water for 12 to 15 seconds. This process, which causes the white to
harden slightly just inside of the shell, keeps the eggs fairly well,
but it is rather difficult to accomplish, as the least overcooking
renders the egg unfit for use as a raw egg.

As a result of many trials, it has been found that putting eggs down in
the various solutions that are used for this purpose is the most
effective way of preserving them under home conditions, provided, of
course, the solutions in which the eggs are immersed do not flavor the
eggs. Therefore, to assist the housewife, detailed directions for using
lime water and water glass for this purpose are here given.

33. PRESERVATION WITH LIMEWATER.--To prepare limewater for the
preservation of eggs, dissolve 1 pound or 1 pint of salt and 1 quart of
finely slaked lime in 3 gallons of water, stir the solution at frequent
intervals for a day or two, and then allow the liquid to settle. Place
the eggs in tall stone crocks or kegs with their pointed ends turned
down, filling the receptacles to within a few inches of the top. Pour
the clear limewater over the eggs so arranged, allowing it to rise an
inch or two above the top layer. Then stand the vessel in a cool place
where the temperature will not exceed 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Eggs so
treated will keep for at least 6 or 8 months. The only objection to this
plan is that the eggs preserved by it sometimes acquire a slight
lime taste.

34. PRESERVATION WITH WATER GLASS.--Putting eggs down in a solution of
water glass is without doubt the most satisfactory method of storing
them in the home. So effective does this method prove that the housewife
who has a convenient and proper storage room should not fail to take
advantage of this way of laying up a supply of eggs.

The commercial form of water glass is usually a mixture of potassium and
sodium silicate, which, besides being cheaper than that which is
chemically pure, is the kind that is preferred for the purpose of
preserving eggs. A good quality of it either in a sirup-like solution or
in the form of a powder retails in drug or grocery stores for about 10
cents a pound. To make a solution of the desired strength to preserve
eggs satisfactorily, dissolve 1 part of water glass in 7 parts of warm
water that has first been boiled to drive off bacteria, mold, spores,
etc. One quart of water glass will make sufficient solution to cover
about 12 dozen eggs. With the solution thoroughly mixed, it is ready to
pour over the eggs.

In selecting eggs for the purpose of storing, be careful to choose only
those which are clean, fresh, and perfectly sound, and, if possible,
infertile. It is advisable not to wash them before they are put into the
preservative, for they will keep better if their bloom is not removed.
Place the eggs in receptacles in the manner explained for preserving
eggs in limewater, and over them pour the water-glass solution until
they are all covered. If the eggs so prepared are stored in a cool
place, they will keep as long as those preserved in limewater; besides,
there will be no danger of their acquiring any foreign flavor.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKING OF EGGS

PRELIMINARY PREPARATION

35. The successful preparation of eggs for their use as a food demands
that certain points must be observed by the housewife. For instance, she
must see that the eggs she uses are in the right condition; that the
shells are properly broken for the most convenient removal of the egg;
that the parts of the egg are separated in the right way in case the
whites and the yolks are to be used separately; and that the eggs
receive the right treatment for the purpose for which they are to be
used. Attention to all these points not only will insure the most
satisfactory results, but will enable the housewife to supply her family
with food that is extremely wholesome and nutritious.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]

36. Exterior Condition of Eggs.--As has been explained, clean eggs are
the most desirable, but it is not advisable to wash eggs that are to be
kept for even a short time, as washing them removes the natural coating
that helps to prevent the entrance of bacteria. However, as it is
necessary that the shells be perfectly clean before they are broken or
before the eggs are cooked, the eggs may be washed or wiped with a damp
cloth immediately before such processes.

37. BREAKING OF EGGS.--In cookery, it is usually desirable to break an
egg shell so that the yolk will not run into the white; that is, so
that these can be kept separate. While there are several methods of
doing this, the housewife should adopt the one that is most convenient
for her. A quick method that is often employed consists in striking the
shell on the edge of the pan or the bowl into which the contents are to
be put. A preferable method, however, is illustrated in Fig. 7. It
consists in striking one side of the shell, midway between the ends, a
sharp blow with the edge of a knife. The advantage of this method will
be evident after a trial or two, for it will be found that the depth of
the cut made by the knife can be so gauged that there will be little
danger of breaking the yolk. Besides, fragments of the shell are not
likely to fall into the bowl or the pan with the contents of the egg.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

38. SEPARATING OF EGGS.--Frequently recipes require that the yolks and
whites of eggs be beaten separately before being added to the other
ingredients. When this is the case, care must be exercised in taking the
egg from the shell. The method by which this is most easily accomplished
is illustrated in Fig. 8. As will be observed, the shell is first broken
as nearly as possible into halves and then, while the egg is poured from
1/2 of the shell into the other, the white is dropped into a dish and
the yolk is retained in the shell. During this process, the yolk should
remain intact in its delicate membrane, for if it becomes mixed with the
white the lightness of the white will be injured. To separate the yolk
from the white is not difficult when eggs are fresh, but as they become
stale the membrane surrounding the yolk grows weak and breaks easily. If
the yolk breaks and any of it falls into the white, it must be
completely removed before the white is beaten.

39. BEATING OF EGGS.--Sometimes eggs are cooked in the shell and other
times they are used alone just as they are removed from the shell, as in
the frying and poaching processes; however, when they are to be
combined with other ingredients, they are usually beaten. Eggs are
beaten for the purpose of mixing the yolk and the white or of
incorporating air to act as a leavening agent when the eggs are heated
in the cooking process. Various utensils, such as a fork, an egg whip,
or an egg beater, may be employed for beating eggs, the one to select
depending on the use to which the eggs are to be put. The rotary, or
Dover, egg beater, previously described as a labor-saving device and
illustrated in Fig. 9 (_a_), should be used to beat either whole eggs or
the yolks of eggs when they are to be used in custards, mayonnaise,
cakes, puddings, etc., as it will beat them sufficiently light for such
purposes. However, for the beating of egg whites, use should be made of
a fork or of an egg whip similar to that shown in (_b_), because the
whites must be lifted instead of stirred for the incorporation of air,
and it is only with a utensil of this kind that this can be
accomplished. Then, too, more air can be incorporated into the whites
and the volume of the egg thereby increased by means of a fork or an egg
whip than by an egg beater. An important point to remember in this
connection is that eggs can be beaten more successfully when they are
cold and have had a pinch of salt added to them.

[Illustration: FIG. 9]

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

40. In the beating of eggs, it should be remembered that for some
purposes, as in making some kinds of sponge cake, they are beaten until
nearly frothy, as shown in Fig. 10, when they do not stand up nor cling
to the whip; whereas, for other purposes, as in making meringue, they
are beaten until they are stiff enough to stand up well and to adhere to
the whip, as Fig. 11 shows. When egg whites are to be beaten stiff, care
should be taken not to continue the beating too long. If this is done,
they will become dry and will break up into small pieces, a condition
that will mean a loss of some of the air that has been incorporated. It
is well also to observe that egg whites should always be beaten in the
same direction and that the same motion should be continued throughout
the beating, for a change of direction or motion always causes a loss of
air. A final precaution to take is never to allow egg whites to stand
after they are beaten. If this is done, the leavening power of the eggs
is reduced, because the air soon escapes from beaten eggs and leaves
underneath them a clear liquid that can never be beaten up. For
instance, eggs that are to be used for boiled icing should not be beaten
until the sirup has finished boiling. However, eggs that have been
separated but not beaten may stand for a couple of hours, provided they
are covered and kept in a cool place.

[Illustration: FIG. 11]


POINTS TO OBSERVE IN COOKING EGGS

41. As has been previously stated, the substance in eggs that requires
special care in the cooking process is the protein, which occurs in this
food in the form of albumen. Because of this, certain points concerning
the treatment that the albumen requires should be kept in mind. In a raw
egg, the albumen occurs in a semiliquid form, but it coagulates at a
lower temperature than does the yolk, which contains a high percentage
of fat. After coagulation, the consistency of the two parts is very
different. The white is elastic and more or less tough, while the yolk,
upon being thoroughly cooked, becomes powdery, or mealy, and breaks up
into minute particles. The egg white begins to coagulate at 134 degrees
Fahrenheit, and it becomes white and jellylike at 160 degrees. Bringing
an egg to such a temperature produces a more desirable result than
cooking it at a high temperature--boiling point, for instance--because
the albumen, instead of becoming tough, as it does at a high
temperature, acquires a soft, tender consistency that exists throughout
the entire egg. An egg cooked in this way is more digestible and
appetizing than one that is boiled until it becomes hard and tough.

42. The low temperature at which eggs will cook in the shell applies
also to eggs when they are combined with other foods. Sometimes,
however, a mixture in which eggs are one of the ingredients must be
cooked at a high temperature because the materials mixed with them
require it. This difficulty can be overcome when eggs are combined with
starchy foods, such as corn starch, rice, and tapioca, that require long
cooking. In such a case, all the ingredients except the eggs may be
cooked the length of time they require, after which the eggs may be
added so that they will cook just long enough to become coagulated.
Longer cooking is liable to spoil the texture. Often the starchy mixture
retains sufficient heat to set the eggs without further cooking after
they are added.

43. A very nutritious way in which to prepare eggs when they are to be
used for a dessert is to combine them with milk to form a custard,
which, after being sweetened and flavored, is baked. The proportion that
has been accepted as ideal to produce a dessert of the right thickness
is one egg to each cupful of milk; however, an entire egg is not always
required, as one yolk is often sufficient to thicken 1 cupful of milk.
Care should be taken in the cooking of such custards, for if they are
cooked too long or at too high a temperature they will curdle and whey;
whereas, a properly cooked custard--that is, one cooked slowly at a low
temperature and for the required length of time--will have a smooth,
jellylike consistency. A slight variation in a dish of this kind is
secured by reducing the number of eggs and thickening it with corn
starch or some other starchy material. While such a mixture is not a
true custard, it makes an excellent dessert.

44. In the cooking of mixtures containing eggs, no utensil proves quite
so satisfactory as the double boiler, which has already been explained
and illustrated. In fact, it is almost impossible to cook an egg mixture
directly over the flame on account of the difficulty encountered in
preventing the eggs from curdling. The low temperature at which cooking
is possible in the double boiler makes it a comparatively simple matter
to bring a mixture to the proper consistency without the formation of
curds. Still, a certain amount of precaution must be taken even with a
double boiler. If the degree of heat that is reached in this utensil is
applied too long, the result will be no more satisfactory than when
mixtures are exposed directly to the heat and cooked at a high
temperature. While every effort should be made to cook mixtures
containing eggs, such as custards or mayonnaise, so as to prevent curds
from forming, occasionally they will form in spite of all that can be
done. However, it is sometimes possible to remedy the matter by placing
the vessel at once in cold water and beating the mixture rapidly with a
Dover egg beater until the curds disappear. The cold water cools the
mixture and prevents the formation of more curds, and the beating breaks
up those which have already formed, provided they are not too hard.

45. In addition to the uses already mentioned, eggs have numerous other
uses in cooking with which the housewife should be familiar. For
instance, slightly beaten egg is used to a great extent to make crumbs
or meal adhere to the surface of croquettes, meat, oysters, etc. that
are to be sautéd or fried in deep fat, a coating of this kind preventing
the food from becoming soaked with grease. In addition, egg is used to
stick flour together for certain kinds of dough, such as noodles. Then,
again, it is much used to puff up mixtures and produce a hollow space in
them, as in popovers and cream puffs. While such mixtures do not require
beating, spongy mixtures, such as omelets and sponge cakes, do. In
these, eggs are an important factor, and they must be thoroughly beaten
in order to incorporate the air in small bubbles and thus produce the
desired texture.


SERVING OF EGGS

46. The manner of serving eggs depends, of course, on the way in which
they are cooked. One point, however, that should never be overlooked, so
far as eggs that are to be served hot is concerned, is that they should
be served immediately upon being prepared, so that they will not have
an opportunity to become cool before being eaten. This applies
particularly to any spongy mixture, such as puff omelet and soufflé, as
these dishes shrink upon standing and become less appetizing in both
appearance and texture.

Several ways of serving soft-cooked eggs are in practice, but probably
the most satisfactory way is to serve them in egg cups. In case cups are
used, they should be heated before being placed on the table, as the
heat that they retain helps to keep the eggs warm. The eggs may be
removed from the shell into the cup and eaten from the cup, or the
unbroken egg may be placed point downwards in the small end of the cup,
a small piece broken from the broad end of the shell, and the egg then
eaten from the shell through the opening made in it. If egg cups are not
available, the eggs may be removed from the shell and served in small
dessert dishes, which also should be heated.

Many egg dishes are made more attractive and appetizing by means of a
garnish of some kind. Small strips or triangular pieces of toast, sprays
of parsley, celery leaves, lettuce, and strips of pimiento are very
satisfactory for this purpose. If no other garnish is desired, just a
sprinkling of paprika adds a touch of color.

47. In connection with the serving of eggs it will be well to note that
they have a tendency to adhere to china and to discolor silver.
Therefore, in the washing of china and the cleaning of silver that have
been used in the serving of raw or slightly cooked eggs, much care
should be exercised. Dishes in which eggs of this kind have been served
should first be washed in cool water in order to remove all the egg, and
then they should be thoroughly washed in hot water. If the hot water is
applied first, the heat will cause the egg to coagulate and cling to the
dishes. Silver that comes in contact with eggs tarnishes or becomes
discolored through the action of the sulphur that is found in them, just
as it does when it is exposed to the air. Dark spots that appear on
silver from this source may be removed by means of a good
silver cleaner.

 EGG RECIPES

48. To enable the housewife to prepare many of the dishes already
mentioned, as well as many other egg dishes, a number of recipes are
here given. These recipes pertain to the cooking of eggs alone in
various ways or to dishes in which eggs are the leading ingredient.
There are, of course, numerous other dishes in which eggs are required,
such as custards, cakes, mayonnaise, etc., but these are omitted here,
as recipes for them are included in the lessons that pertain directly to
them. In the first few recipes, the ingredients are omitted and merely
directions given, for the eggs themselves are practically the only thing
required, especially so far as the cooking is concerned. However, in the
majority of cases, the ingredients are listed in the usual manner and
explicit directions then given for carrying out the recipe.

49. SOFT-COOKED, OR JELLIED, EGGS.--Eggs that are cooked soft, or
jellied, may be used for any meal in which plain eggs can be served.
When properly prepared, they are both digestible and attractive, and any
person who is able to eat eggs at all can eat them in this form.

To prepare soft-cooked, or jellied, eggs, first bring to the boiling
point sufficient water to cover well the desired number of eggs, which
is usually 1 pint of water to each egg. Then drop the eggs into the
water carefully, remove the pan from the fire, place a cover on it, and
set it on the back of the stove, where the water will not heat further
nor cool too rapidly. Allow the eggs to remain in the water for
5 minutes.

When eggs cooked in this manner are served, they will be found to be the
consistency of jelly all the way through. This method of cooking is
preferable to boiling them for 3, 4, or 5 minutes, because boiling cooks
the white just inside the shell very hard, while the yolk of the egg
remains liquid.

50. POACHED EGGS.--Eggs properly poached make a very attractive
breakfast dish, but the poaching should be well done in order to have
the dish attractive and digestible. The food value of a plain poached
egg is, of course, identically the same as that of a soft-cooked, a
hard-cooked, or a raw egg. Eggs are usually poached in a shallow pan,
although egg poachers are to be had.

To poach eggs in a shallow pan, pour into the pan sufficient water to
cover the eggs that are to be cooked, add a teaspoonful of salt or of
vinegar for each pint of water, and bring it to the boiling point.
Remove the pan from the flame or reduce the heat so that the water will
cease to boil. Break the eggs, one at a time, into a saucer and then
slide them carefully into the water. Do not allow the water to boil
after the eggs have been added, as boiling toughens the egg white and in
addition causes considerable loss by tearing it into shreds. When the
eggs are set, remove them carefully from the water and season them with
salt and pepper. A convenient way to remove the eggs is to use a large
spoon that has holes in the bowl for draining off the water. The salt or
vinegar is added to the water before cooking in order to solidify the
albumen and keep it in a mass.

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

An egg poacher contains a perforated section of metal just large enough
to hold an egg. In poaching eggs with such a utensil, the perforated
part is placed over a pan of boiling water; then the egg is carefully
slid into it, and allowed to poach. Eggs prepared in this way are really
cooked by steam and are found to be very satisfactory.

51. POACHED EGGS ON TOAST.--Eggs poached according to the directions
just given can be made both appetizing and attractive by serving them on
toast, as shown in Fig. 12; indeed, the addition of toast to a poached
egg adds a quantity of carbohydrate, a food principle in which the egg
is lacking. If the toast is buttered, fat is added, and such a dish,
together with fruit, makes a very excellent breakfast. A slice of toast
of medium size with the usual amount of butter and egg will have a food
value of about 225 calories. In preparing poached eggs on toast, the
usual custom is to butter slices of freshly made toast, moisten them
with hot milk or cream, and place on them freshly poached eggs. The eggs
are then seasoned with salt and pepper, and, if desired, a little piece
of butter may be dropped on each one. To add to the attractiveness of
such a dish, the toast may be cut round with a cookie cutter or a square
piece may be cut diagonally to make two triangular pieces.

52. HARD-COOKED EGGS.--Eggs that are cooked hard may be served hot or
cold, or they may be used in numerous ways, as, for example, to garnish
a dish to which the addition of protein is desirable or to supply a
high-protein dish for some light meal.

To prepare hard-cooked eggs, bring to the boiling point sufficient water
to cover well the desired number of eggs, about 1 pint of water for each
egg to be cooked usually being sufficient. Carefully drop the eggs into
the water and place the pan on the back of the stove where the water
will not boil, but will stay hot. Allow the eggs to remain in the hot
water for 45 minutes; then remove them, and if they are desired hot,
serve them at once. If they are not to be served hot, pour cold water
over them and allow them to cool before removing the shells in order to
prevent the yolks from discoloring.

When prepared in this way, eggs will be found to be tender and at the
same time well cooked; whereas, if they are cooked at the boiling point,
they are certain to be tough and leathery and consequently less
digestible.

53. FRIED EGGS.--Fried eggs are likely to be more or less indigestible,
because the hot fat coagulates the protein and makes it very hard. The
addition of fat, however, increases the food value of the eggs to a
certain extent. To fry eggs, melt enough butter or other fat in a frying
pan to cover its surface well. Break the eggs one at a time into a
saucer and slip them into the hot fat. Season with salt and pepper. Fry
until the white has become well solidified on the bottom, and then
either turn them over or put a few drops of water in the pan and cover
it tight with a cover, so that the steam will cook the top of the egg.
Fry until the desired degree of hardness has been obtained, and
then serve.

54. SCRAMBLED EGGS.--A pleasing variety from the usual methods of
preparation is offered by means of scrambled eggs, which are not
difficult to make. Too long cooking, however, should be guarded against,
for it will cause the protein in the eggs to become too hard and to
separate from the liquid and will produce watery scrambled eggs. To be
most satisfactory, they should be taken from the pan just before they
have finished cooking, for the heat that they hold will complete it.
Eggs prepared in this way, according to the accompanying recipe, may be
served on toast or with ham and bacon. If they are served with meat, a
smaller portion of meat should be given to a person than is
ordinarily served.

SCRAMBLED EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
3/4 c. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. butter

Beat the eggs slightly, and to them add the milk and seasonings. Melt
the butter in a frying pan and, when the butter is hot, pour the egg
mixture into it. As the eggs begin to thicken, stir them up from the
bottom of the pan and continue to stir them until the entire mass has
thickened slightly. Before the eggs are entirely cooked, remove them
from the pan. Bacon and ham fat may be used instead of butter, and they
are strongly recommended if they can be secured, for they lend an
excellent flavor to scrambled eggs.

55. SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH TOMATO.--The addition of tomato to scrambled
eggs lends an unusual flavor as well as a little variety to the dish.
The same conditions apply to the cooking of scrambled eggs with tomato
as apply to plain scrambled eggs; namely, that too long cooking ruins
them. The onion included in the recipe here given may be omitted from
the dish if it is not desirable. The fat to be used may be in the form
of butter, although bacon or ham fat may be substituted to give an
agreeable flavor.

SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH TOMATO
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 Tb. fat
1 slice onion
1 c. stewed tomatoes
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
6 eggs

Put the fat into a frying pan, and when this grease is hot add the slice
of onion and fry it until it is brown. Remove the onion from the fat,
and add the stewed tomatoes, salt, and pepper. Then beat the eggs
slightly and add them to the hot tomato. Stir the mixture slowly from
the bottom of the pan until it is slightly thickened. Remove from the
pan and serve hot.

56. SCRAMBLED EGGS ON TOAST.--The addition of cheese to eggs, as in the
accompanying recipe, makes a dish that is very high in protein and
usually pleasing in flavor. So as not to overcook the eggs in this dish,
they should be cooked only slightly in the pan, because they receive
additional cooking when the dish is placed in the oven to melt the
cheese. Browning the cheese slightly on top makes a very attractive
dish, especially when garnished with parsley.

SCRAMBLED EGGS ON TOAST
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
3/4 c. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. fat
1/2 c. grated cheese
6 slices of toast

Beat the eggs slightly, and to them add the milk, salt, and pepper. Melt
the fat in a frying pan, and when it is hot add the egg mixture. Stir
the mixture as it cooks until it has thickened slightly; then pour it
over the slices of toast placed in a shallow pan. Sprinkle the grated
cheese over the top, and place under a lighted broiler or in a very hot
oven until the cheese melts. Remove to a platter garnish with parsley,
and serve.

57. SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH HAM.--The accompanying recipe affords an
excellent way in which to use up the little scraps of ham that may be
cut from the bone when it is impossible to cut enough nice looking
pieces to serve as a cold dish. Eggs prepared in this way will be found
very tasty and will take the place of a meat dish for luncheon
or supper.

SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH HAM
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
1 c. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 c. chopped cooked ham
2 Tb. fat

Beat the eggs slightly, and to them add the milk, salt, pepper, and ham.
Melt the fat in a frying pan and scramble the mixture as directed in
Art. 54 until it is slightly thickened. Remove from the stove and serve
at once. If desired, this dish may be served on toast. Other left-over
meat, such as roast beef or pork, may be used in place of ham, but such
meats do not make so tasty a dish, the flavor of ham in such a
combination being more desirable.  58. PLAIN OMELET.--The simplest type
of omelet, which is known as plain omelet, does not differ materially
from scrambled eggs, except that the whole is collected in a mass in an
omelet shape. No difficulty will be experienced in making such an omelet
if the directions in the recipe here given are followed explicitly. To
make this dish more attractive, some food of a contrasting color, such
as jelly or tomatoes, may be used for garnishing.

PLAIN OMELET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
6 Tb. water
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
3 Tb. fat

Beat the eggs, and to them add the water, salt, and pepper. Heat the fat
in an omelet pan or a small frying pan, and when it is hot add the egg
mixture. When the egg on the bottom of the pan has thickened, tip the
pan and draw the thickened portion toward the handle with the end of a
knife, allowing the uncooked egg to run over the pan, and when that has
thickened on the bottom, draw it up as before. Repeat until all of the
egg has been cooked and an oblong-shaped omelet is formed. Place on a
hot platter or plate, garnish with parsley or jelly, and serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

59. PUFF OMELET.--Many housewives consider it to be a very difficult
thing to make a puff omelet successfully; but such need not be the case
if fresh eggs are used and the usual amount of care is taken in its
preparation. The whites of the eggs must not be over-beaten, as too much
beating will cause the loss of air and will not permit the omelet to
become sufficiently light. Another precaution is that the mixture should
not be overcooked, for the application of heat after it has been
sufficiently cooked will cause it to shrink. How a puff omelet made
according to the recipe here given should look, is shown in Fig. 13.
This is a very pleasing dish and never fails to appeal to those persons
who are fond of eggs.

PUFF OMELET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. bread crumbs
4 Tb. milk
4 eggs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
3 Tb. fat

Soak the bread crumbs in the milk. Separate the yolks and whites of the
eggs. Beat the egg yolks and add them to the crumbs and milk. Add the
salt and pepper. Beat the egg whites until stiff and fold them carefully
into the yolk mixture. Heat the fat in an omelet pan or a frying pan,
and when it is hot pour the mixture into it. Cook over a very slow fire,
being careful not to burn the mixture, until a knife can be slipped
under and the whole mixture raised. By this time the top should be quite
puffed up. Place the pan in a hot oven, where the omelet should puff
still more, and cook until it is no longer raw. With a knife, score
across through the center on a straight line with the handle. Then
carefully fold the omelet double, roll it out on a hot platter or plate,
as shown in Fig. 14, garnish with parsley, and serve at once. If an
omelet of this kind stands for any length of time after it is served, it
will shrink and be much less appetizing.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

60. CHEESE OMELET.--If an additional amount of protein in the form of
casein is desired in an omelet, the accompanying recipe for cheese
omelet should be tried. The addition of cheese makes this dish even a
better meat substitute than either the plain or the puff omelet.
Likewise, the cheese adds flavor, which may be increased if desired by
the addition of more cheese than the recipe calls for. Although this
recipe mentions butter, fat other than butter may be used.

CHEESE OMELET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1/2 c. grated cheese
2 Tb. bread crumbs
4 Tb. milk
4 eggs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
3 Tb. butter

Mix the grated cheese with the bread crumbs, milk, egg yolks, salt, and
pepper. Beat the egg whites until they are stiff and fold them into the
other ingredients. To cook the omelet, proceed according to the
directions given for making puff omelet in Art. 59.

61. TOMATO OMELET.--The addition of tomatoes to an omelet makes an
attractive dish as far as color is concerned, and, at the same time, it
gives variety by improving the flavor. Such an omelet is also less
concentrated than a plain omelet, for the tomatoes provide bulk and
additional water is added. While in a way these lower the food value of
the dish, the loss is more than made up by the qualities that are added.

TOMATO OMELET
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
1/2 c. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
3 Tb. fat
2 medium-sized ripe tomatoes

Beat the eggs, and to them add the milk, salt, and pepper. Heat the fat
in a pan large enough to make the egg mixture 1/2 inch deep when poured
into it. Cook slowly until it is well done. Peel and cut the tomatoes
into slices 1/3 inch thick. Place the sliced tomatoes on 1/2 of the
omelet, sprinkle them with salt and pepper, score the omelet through the
center, and fold the other half over the tomatoes. Then slide the omelet
on a hot platter, garnish with lettuce or parsley, and serve at once.

62. VARIETY IN OMELETS.--From the recipes given for omelets, it will be
noted that this dish may be made plain or may be varied by adding
ingredients that provide flavoring or increase the nutritive value. In
addition to the suggestions that have been made in these recipes, there
is an almost endless number of ways in which omelets may be varied. For
instance, left-over bits of any kind of meat, such as a roast, a steak,
or chops, from the day before or bits of bacon fried for a previous meal
may be chopped fine and utilized for this purpose. Cheese cut fine or
grated and mixed with the eggs helps to make a delicious omelet. Bread
crumbs, cracker crumbs, rice, riced potatoes, or left-over cereal may
be used, as well as mushrooms, chopped or whole, and oysters raw or
previously scalloped or fried and then chopped. Bits of fish, such as
left-over crab or lobster, will do nicely for increasing variety. Often
jelly, jam, and fruit or vegetables are folded inside after the omelet
is cooked.

63. STUFFED EGGS.--A highly seasoned cold dish that is delicious for
picnics or cold lunches can be made by removing the yolks from
hard-cooked eggs, seasoning them, and then stuffing them into the
whites, as is explained in the recipe here given. Eggs so prepared also
make a desirable high-protein dish for summer weather when meat dishes
fail to appeal to the appetite. Wafers or tiny bread-and-butter
sandwiches served with stuffed eggs make them more attractive.

STUFFED EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 hard-cooked eggs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/8 tsp. paprika
1/2 tsp. mustard
2 Tb. vinegar

Cut the eggs in half, either lengthwise or crosswise. Remove the yolks,
mash them, add to them the salt, pepper, paprika, mustard, and vinegar,
and mix thoroughly. Fill the egg whites with the yolk mixture. The eggs
will be much more appetizing in appearance if the yolk is not packed
smoothly back into the white but allowed to stand up roughly. The plate
on which the eggs are served should be nicely garnished with lettuce,
parsley, or celery leaves.

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

64. CREAMED EGGS.--If a dish that will serve well for luncheon or a
light supper is desired, creamed eggs, as illustrated in Fig. 15, will
be found very satisfactory, for the cream sauce that is served on them
and the toast on which the eggs are placed add carbohydrate to an
otherwise high-protein dish. The eggs used in this dish must be
hard-cooked in water, so as not to be indigestible. Paprika sprinkled
over the top and parsley used as a garnish add colors that make the dish
very attractive.

CREAMED EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1-1/2 c. milk
2 Tb. fat
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. paprika
6 hard-cooked eggs
6 slices of toast

Heat the milk. Put the fat in a saucepan and heat it until it is light
brown; then add the flour, salt, and paprika to the melted fat and mix
all thoroughly. Pour in the hot milk and stir the mixture constantly
until the sauce has become smooth and thick. Cut the hard-cooked eggs
into halves while they are hot, and place two halves with the cut sides
down on each piece of toast. Pour the white sauce over all, sprinkle
with paprika, and serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

65. Eggs à la Goldenrod.--Closely resembling creamed eggs in composition
and food value, but differing from them somewhat in appearance, are eggs
à la goldenrod, which are illustrated in Fig. 16. This is, perhaps, even
a more attractive dish if it is nicely made than creamed eggs, and many
persons who do not like hard-cooked eggs find this dish agreeable and
are able to digest it.

EGGS À LA GOLDENROD
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. milk
2 Tb. fat
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
4 hard-cooked eggs
6 slices of toast

Heat the milk. Brown the fat in a saucepan, add the flour, salt, and
pepper, and mix well. Then add the hot milk and stir until the sauce
thickens. Chop the whites of the hard-cooked eggs into small pieces, and
mix them with the white sauce. Arrange the toast on a platter and pour
the sauce over it. Put the hard-cooked egg yolks through a sieve or a
ricer and sprinkle them on top of the white sauce. Serve hot.

66. SCALLOPED EGGS.--A quantity of carbohydrate is added to eggs when
they are scalloped, for the white sauce and the cracker crumbs that are
used in this dish supply this food substance. The cold meat that this
dish requires and that should be well chopped into small pieces may be
left-over from roasted, stewed, or even broiled meat. As this provides
an additional amount of protein, the dish on the whole serves as an
excellent substitute for meat with carbohydrate added.

SCALLOPED EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. milk
2 Tb. fat
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. flour
1 c. cracker crumbs
4 hard-cooked eggs
1 c. chopped cold meat

Heat the milk. Brown the fat in a saucepan, add the salt, pepper, and
flour, and mix well. To this add the hot milk. Cook until the sauce
thickens, stirring constantly. Grease a baking dish and place in it 1/3
cupful of the cracker crumbs. Over the crumbs arrange two of the eggs
sliced thinly, and on the top of the eggs put half of the meat. Repeat
by adding a layer of 1/3 cupful of the crumbs, the remaining eggs
sliced, and the remainder of the meat. Pour the white sauce over all and
arrange the remaining 1/3 cupful of crumbs on top. Bake in a moderate
oven for 1/2 hour. Serve hot from the baking dish.

67. INDIVIDUAL BAKING DISHES FOR EGG RECIPES.--Although the directions
given in the preceding recipe for scalloped eggs state that this recipe
is baked in a baking dish, it is not necessary that one large dish of
this kind be used, for, if desired, individual baking dishes may be
substituted. In fact, any recipe for which a large baking dish would
ordinarily be used may be baked in the small dishes used for a single
serving, and eggs prepared in this way are especially attractive. Such
dishes are also used for the baking of custards or the molding of jelly
and blanc mange. Since they prove very useful and find so much favor,
it is advisable for every housewife to add a few of them to her supply
of utensils and to become familiar with the varieties that can be
secured and the proper way to use them.

Dishes of this kind may be purchased in both cheap and expensive
varieties and in plain or fancy styles, being made of white porcelain,
of glass, or of the brown ware so much used for large baking dishes and
casseroles and having a white glazing on the inside.

68. When such dishes are used as a means of adding variety to the
cooking and serving of eggs, they should be placed in the oven in a
shallow pan containing enough hot water to come nearly to the top of
them. The object of this plan is to keep the temperature uniform. As
long as the dishes are surrounded by water, the food to be cooked will
not attain a greater heat than 212 degrees Fahrenheit, because the
surrounding water cannot reach a higher temperature. Food cooked in this
way will be found to be baked much more evenly and to be of a better
consistency than food that is subjected to the high temperature of the
oven. Most of the recipes that follow, while they can be baked in large
baking dishes if desired and then served from the dish, are designed
particularly to be used in individual baking dishes.

69. BAKED EGGS IN CREAM.--A dish that is particularly desirable for
breakfast, but that may be served for luncheon, is made by baking eggs
in cream according to the accompanying recipe. Besides being very
appetizing, this dish is high in food value because of the addition of
the cream and fat. Crisp toast served with eggs prepared in this way is
very delightful.

BAKED EGGS IN CREAM
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 eggs
1 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
3/4 c. cream

Grease six individual baking dishes and break an egg into each. Put a
small piece of butter on top of each egg and season with salt and
pepper. Pour over each egg two tablespoonfuls of cream. Place the baking
dishes in a shallow pan of hot water and bake until the eggs are as hard
as desired. Serve hot.

70. SHIRRED EGGS WITH HAM.--An excellent way in which to utilize scraps
of ham is to combine them with eggs to make a dish that may be served
in place of meat. This dish, besides being high in food value, is very
tasty because of the flavor of the ham and the fact that it is quite
highly seasoned.

SHIRRED EGGS WITH HAM
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1/2 tsp. prepared mustard
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 c. chopped ham
6 eggs
1/4 tsp. salt
1 Tb. butter

Grease six individual baking dishes. Mix the mustard and pepper with the
ham, and then divide this mixture as evenly as possible into the baking
dishes. Break an egg on top of the ham in each dish, season with salt,
and put a small piece of butter on each. Place the dishes in a shallow
pan of hot water and bake in a moderate oven until the eggs are well set
or hardened. Remove from the oven and serve at once.

71. EGG SOUFFLÉ.--If a delicate dish for children or invalids is
desired, egg soufflé will answer the purpose very well. This dish is
light in character, but it is high in protein and to most persons is
very delightful. It is more attractive if baked in individual baking
dishes, but it may be baked in a large baking dish and served directly
from the dish. To improve the flavor of egg soufflé and make it a more
appetizing dish, tomato sauce is often served with it.

EGG SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 c. milk
2 Tb. fat
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1 Tb. chopped parsley
4 eggs

Heat the milk. Brown the fat in a saucepan, add to it the flour, salt,
and parsley, and mix well. Pour in the hot milk, stir constantly until
the sauce thickens, and then remove from the fire. Separate the eggs and
add the well-beaten yolks to the sauce, stirring rapidly so that the egg
will not curd. Beat the whites stiff and fold them carefully into the
sauce. Turn into well-greased individual baking dishes until they are
about two-thirds full, place in a shallow pan of hot water, and bake
until firm when touched with the finger. Serve at once in the dishes in
which they are baked, because they shrink when they are allowed to cool.

72. The tomato sauce that is often served with egg soufflé is made as
follows:

TOMATO SAUCE

1 1/2 c. strained stewed tomatoes
2 Tb. fat
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. flour

Force enough stewed tomatoes through a sieve to make 1 1/2 cupfuls of
strained tomato. Heat the strained tomato and to it add the fat, salt,
and pepper. Moisten the flour with a little cold water and add it to the
hot tomato. Cook for 5 minutes. Serve over the soufflé.

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

73. Alpine Eggs.--It is rather unusual to combine cream or cottage
cheese with eggs, so that when this is done, as in the accompanying
recipe, a dish that is out of the ordinary is the result. If not a
sufficient amount of cottage cheese is in supply to serve for a meal, it
may very well be used for this dish. Otherwise, cream cheese
serves nicely.

ALPINE EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 10-cent pkgs. cream cheese or
1 c. cottage cheese
2 Tb. finely chopped parsley
1/8 tsp. paprika
6 eggs
1 Tb. butter
1 1/2 tsp. salt

Grease six individual baking dishes. Break up the cheese with a fork and
sprinkle a layer on the bottom of each dish. Break an egg in each dish
over the cheese. Season with salt. Sprinkle a layer of cheese on top of
the egg, and over that put chopped parsley, paprika, and a small piece
of butter. Place the baking dishes in a shallow pan of hot water and
bake in a moderate oven until the eggs are set. Remove from the oven and
serve at once.

74. Clipped Eggs.--The chief value of clipped eggs is their appearance,
which, as will be observed in Fig. 17, is very attractive. This dish
adds much to the breakfast tray of an invalid or will tempt the
appetite of a child who does not feel like eating. But in addition to
being attractive, this dish is high in food value, for in this respect
it is exactly equivalent to a poached egg on toast or a plain egg served
with a piece of toast to which is added a small amount of butter.

CLIPPED EGGS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 pieces toast
3 Tb. butter
6 eggs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Butter the toast with some of the butter. Separate the whites and yolks
of the eggs without breaking the yolks. Beat the whites stiff, and put a
mound of the beaten white on top of each piece of buttered toast. Make a
hole in the center of the mound of egg white and drop the unbroken yolk
into it. Season each with salt and pepper and bits of the remaining
butter. Place in a hot oven and bake until the yolk is set and the white
slightly browned. Serve hot.

75. LEFT-OVER EGGS.--It is not a difficult matter to utilize eggs in any
form in which they may be left over, for they combine readily with many
other foods. For instance, left-over hard-cooked eggs may be sliced or
chopped and used to garnish dishes of vegetables, meat, fish, or salads.
Eggs cooked in this way may also be stuffed according to the recipe
given in Art. 63, or they may be crushed and mixed with seasoning for
sandwiches. If any soft-cooked eggs remain after a meal, they should be
hard-cooked in order to be used to the best advantage. Left-over omelet
or scrambled, poached, or fried eggs may be chopped and added to soups,
sauces, or gravies, or combined with small pieces of meat or fish and
used with crumbs and white sauce to make a scalloped dish.

Even uncooked eggs that are taken from the shells, but that cannot be
used at once, need not be wasted if proper care is given to them to
prevent the formation of a hard crust over their surface. Such eggs
should be put into a dish that will allow as little of the surface as
possible to be exposed and should be covered with cold water and kept in
a cool place. When they are desired for use, the water should be poured
off carefully so as to prevent the loss of any of the egg.

 BREAKFAST MENU

76. So that a definite idea may be formed of the student's progress in
cookery, there is here presented a breakfast menu that is to be prepared
and reported on at the same time that the answers to the Examination
Questions are sent. This menu is practical and it may be easily
prepared, as all the dishes it contains have already been considered.

MENU

Sliced Bananas
Cream of Wheat
Graham Muffins
Butter
Puff Omelet
Coffee

In most homes, breakfast is a meal that is gathered together with as
little thought and preparation as possible. The reason for this is that
the housewife feels that she does not wish to rise early enough in the
morning to prepare an elaborate menu. Breakfast, however, should be the
most attractive meal in the day, because it is one that gives to each
member of the family the right start for the day and sustains him until
luncheon time. In most cases, a cup of coffee and a slice or two of
toast do not start one with a cheerful attitude, nor do they contain
sufficient food value to nourish the individual properly. With a little
forethought and planning, certain foods may be partly prepared for
breakfast the day before. If this is done, the time required for the
actual preparation of the breakfast need not be greatly increased. For
example, in the accompanying menu, the cream of wheat may be cooked the
evening before, the materials for the graham muffins measured, and even
the pan in which they are to be baked greased, and the materials for the
omelet collected and measured. If all this is done, the preparation
necessary in the morning will consist merely of slicing the bananas,
reheating the cream of wheat, preparing the coffee, baking the muffins,
and making the omelet. While the coffee and cream of wheat are heating
or cooking, the oven will be heating, so that when the muffins are mixed
it will be ready to bake them; and while these are baking the omelet may
be prepared. When this is done, all will be ready to serve.

 EGGS

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) Give a brief description of the physical structure of an egg.

(2) (_a_) Why are eggs an important article of diet? (_b_) For what
foods may they be substituted?

(3) (_a_) Mention the food substances that are found in an egg, and give
the percentage of each one. (_b_) What food substance is lacking in
eggs, and how may it be supplied?

(4) What is the chief food substance in: (_a_) an egg white? (_b_) an
egg yolk?

(5) Discuss briefly the digestibility of eggs.

(6) (_a_) Of what value is the grading of eggs? (_b_) What points are
considered when eggs are graded?

(7) (_a_) What conditions affect the quality of eggs? (6) Mention the
agencies that render the quality of eggs inferior and explain how
they work.

(8) How can the quality of eggs be determined: (_a_) in the market?
(_b_) in the home?

(9) (_a_) What is the common commercial means of preserving eggs? (_b_)
How is it beneficial to the housewife?

(10) (_a_) Mention the various ways by which eggs may be preserved in
the home. (_b_) Explain the preservation of eggs with water glass.

(11) When may the shells of eggs be washed?

(12) (_a_) What is the preferable method of breaking an egg? (_b_)
Explain how the yolk and the white of an egg may be separated.

(13) (_a_) For what purposes are eggs beaten? (_b_) With what kind of
egg beater should egg yolks or whole eggs be beaten?

(14) (_a_) With what kind of utensil should egg whites be beaten? (_b_)
Why should egg whites not be allowed to stand after beating?

(15) (_a_) What is the effect of heat upon an egg? (_b_) Why are eggs
cooked in the shell better if they are cooked at a temperature lower
than boiling point? (_c_) Cook an egg by boiling it rapidly for 20
minutes. Cook another egg according to the directions given in Art. 52.
Remove the shells while the eggs are warm, compare the texture, and
report the differences.

(16) (_a_) When eggs are used in a mixture that is to be cooked for a
long time, when should they be added? (_b_) What can be substituted for
some of the eggs in a mixture that requires eggs for thickening?

(17) (_a_) What point should never be overlooked in the serving of eggs
that are intended to be served hot? (_b_) Why should spongy egg dishes
be served immediately after cooking?

(18) (_a_) How should dishes that have contained eggs be washed? (_b_)
Why is such care necessary?

(19) (_a_) What precautions should be taken in the making of a puff
omelet? (_b_) Mention some of the things that may be used to give
variety to omelets.

(20) (_a_) What are the advantages of individual baking dishes? (_b_)
State how these should be put in the oven and explain the object of
this plan.


REPORT ON MENU

After trying out the menu given in the text, send with your answers to
the Examination Questions a written report of your success in making it.
On your report simply write the name of the food and describe its
condition by means of the terms specified in the following list:

Cream of Wheat: thin? thick? properly seasoned? smooth? lumpy?

Graham Muffins: light? heavy? texture coarse? texture fine? even brown
color on crust? well flavored?

Puff Omelet: light? heavy? underdone? overdone? even brown on bottom?
tough? tender? properly seasoned?

       *       *       *       *       *


 VEGETABLES (PART 1)

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPORTANCE OF VEGETABLES AS FOOD

VARIETY IN VEGETABLES

1. As understood in cookery, VEGETABLES refer to plants or parts of
plants that are used as food. Vegetables may consist of the entire
plant, as, for example, the beet; the stem, as asparagus and celery; the
root, as carrot and turnip; the underground stem, or tuber, as the white
potato and onion; the foliage, as cabbage and spinach; the flower of the
plant, as cauliflower; the pods, which hold the seeds of the plant or
the seeds themselves, as peas and beans; or that which in reality is
fruit, although for table use always considered a vegetable, as the
tomato and eggplant.

2. Because of this large assortment, vegetables afford the greatest
possible variety in flavor, appearance, texture, quality, and food
value. They therefore assume a place of very great importance in the
diet of individuals and in the plans of the housewife who has all the
meals to prepare for her family. In fact, there is scarcely a meal,
except breakfast, at which vegetables are not served. For dinner, they
form a part or all of each course in the meal, except, perhaps, the
dessert, and occasionally they may be used for this.

Although two or more vegetables are nearly always served in even a
simple meal, the use of vegetables in most households is limited to
those few varieties which are especially preferred by the family. As a
rule, there are a number of other vegetables that would be very
acceptable if prepared in certain appetizing ways. An effort should
therefore be made to include all such vegetables in the dietary, for
they may be used to decided advantage and at the same time they afford
variety in the meals. The constant demand for variety in this food makes
acceptable new recipes for the preparation of the vegetables already
known and information for the use of the unfamiliar kinds.

3. Great variety also exists in the flavor of vegetables, which they
derive from their volatile oils; that is, the oils that evaporate
rapidly on exposure to the air. In some cases, the flavor is
disagreeably strong and must be dissipated, or driven away, in order to
make the vegetables agreeable to the taste and to prevent them from
disagreeing with those who eat them. In others, the flavor is very mild,
so that unless the vegetables are properly prepared the flavor may be
almost lost. When the principles relating to the cooking of vegetables
are thoroughly understood, little difficulty will be experienced in
preparing them so that the flavor is dissipated or retained as the case
may require.

4. The food value of vegetables varies as much as do their form and
flavor, some of them having almost no food value, others having a great
deal, and the remainder varying between these two extremes. The
housewife who wishes to provide economically for her family and at the
same time give them food that is best suited to their needs, should
learn as much of the composition and food value of the various kinds of
vegetables as possible. If, besides acquiring this knowledge, she learns
a variety of ways in which to prepare each kind, she will find that it
is possible to substitute vegetable dishes for the more expensive foods.
For instance, it is often possible to substitute a vegetable dish for a
meat dish several times a week, but the composition of the vegetable
dish must be such that it will really take the place of the meat dish.

5. That it is possible for adults to live on vegetables alone has been
proved by vegetarians; that is, persons who exclude meat from the diet.
They have shown that all the elements necessary to build and maintain
the human body are contained in vegetables, fruits, and cereals, and
also that these elements are in such quantity that it is not necessary
to supply them in any other way. Even if it is not desired to use such
foods exclusively, as much use should be made of them as possible, for
they average a lower cost than the high-protein foods, such as eggs,
meat, and milk. The use of vegetables, however, need not be restricted
to adults, for when properly prepared they may be included to advantage
in the diet of very young children. In fact, children should be trained
to eat vegetables of all kinds, for such training not only will enable
each one to grow up with a correct appreciation for all edible things,
but will make the preparation of meals easier for the housewife.

6. Vegetables should receive great care in their preparation, whether
the method involved is simple or complicated. Any of the methods of
cookery that call for the application of heat may be applied to them,
and in many cases they are served without cooking, merely dressing or
seasoning being added. Good vegetables may be ruined by improper
preparation, while those which are in excellent condition may be
improved by the application of the correct methods in their preparation.
Vegetables that are inexpensive but highly nutritious should be used
when it is necessary to practice economy, because, when they are
properly prepared, they form a valuable addition to a meal.

7. All varieties of vegetables are grown almost universally. This fact,
together with the facts that they mature at different times during the
season, according to the climate in which they are grown, and that most
varieties can be conveniently shipped, makes the season in which certain
fresh vegetables can be obtained much longer than it formerly was. For
instance, very early in the season, long before it is possible to have
beans, peas, and other vegetables in the North, they are shipped from
the extreme South, and as the season advances, they mature farther and
farther north. Therefore, they may be constantly supplied to the
northern markets until the time when they mature in that locality.

8. In order not to waste vegetables and to have them in the best
possible condition when they are desired for preparation, every
housewife should realize that the selection and care of vegetables are
also important matters to consider. The selection must be learned by
familiarity with them, as well as practice in buying, and the housewife
must be guided by the suitability of the vegetables and the money she
has to spend for them. The care that must be given to them is determined
by the kinds that are purchased, some requiring one kind of care in
storage and others entirely different attention.

 STRUCTURE, COMPOSITION, AND FOOD VALUE

9. STRUCTURE OF VEGETABLES.--Although vegetables vary greatly in
composition and consequently in food value, they are similar so far as
physical structure is concerned. In general, they consist of a skeleton
framework that is made up of cellulose. Their digestible part is
composed of tiny cells having thin walls that confine the actual food
material in the form of a liquid or semiliquid. As the vegetables grow
old, the cellulose material and the cell walls gradually toughen, with
the result that old vegetables are less easily made tender than young
ones and are not so agreeable to the taste as those which have not grown
hard. The total food value of vegetables, as well as of cereals, meats,
and, in fact, all foods, varies with the quantity of water and cellulose
they contain. Therefore, the vegetables that contain the least coarse
material are the ones that have the highest food value.

10. The green color that characterizes many vegetables is due to a
substance called _chlorophyl_. This substance is essential to the normal
growth of plants and is present in the correct amount in only those
which are properly exposed to the sunlight. Sufficient proof of this is
seen in the case of vegetables that form heads, as, for instance,
cabbage and head lettuce. As is well known, the outside leaves are
green, while the inside ones are practically white. Since it is exposure
to the light that produces the green color, a vegetable or plant of any
kind can be bleached by merely covering it in order to keep out the
sunlight. This procedure also enables the plants to remain more tender
than those which have been allowed to grow in the normal way and become
green. For instance, the inside leaves of a head of lettuce are always
very much more tender than the green outside leaves. In fact, the center
of any kind of plant, that is, the leaves and the stem that appear last,
are more tender, possess a lighter color, and have a more delicate
flavor than the older ones.

11. PROTEIN IN VEGETABLES.--Taken as a whole, vegetables are not high in
protein. Some of them contain practically none of this food substance
and others contain a comparatively large amount, but the average is
rather low. Vegetables that are high in water, such as lettuce, celery,
tomatoes, and cucumbers, contain so little protein that the quantity is
not appreciable. Such vegetables as potatoes, beets, carrots, etc.
contain slightly larger quantities. Dried vegetables, such as beans,
peas, and lentils, contain comparatively large amounts of this
substance, and for this reason may be substituted for such high-protein
foods as meat and fish.

12. The composition of vegetable protein is only slightly different from
that of animal protein. In fact, the experiments of scientists show that
animal protein may be readily replaced by vegetable protein. One of
these proteins is sometimes called _vegetable albumin_, but the chief
protein of vegetables containing the largest amount of this substance,
namely, beans, peas, and lentils, is called _legumin_, from the term
_legumes_, the name of this class of vegetables. It is generally agreed
that vegetable protein is not so digestible as animal protein, but this
disadvantage is offset by the fact that it does not bring about so much
intestinal trouble as does the protein of animal foods and is less
likely to cause disturbances that are usually attributed to foods high
in this substance. Vegetable protein is affected by heat in much the
same way as other protein.

When any of the dry vegetables high in protein are served at a meal,
meat should be eliminated, or the result will be an oversupply of
protein. As this condition is not only harmful but wasteful, it is one
that should receive proper consideration from the housewife.

13. FAT IN VEGETABLES.--As vegetables as a class are low in protein, so
are they low in fat. In the case of some vegetables, the quantity of fat
they contain is so small that it is never considered in discussing the
food value of these vegetables, while in others slightly larger
quantities are to be found. However, on the whole, vegetables are so
nearly lacking in this food substance that it is necessary to supply fat
in their preparation and in the serving of meals in which they are
included. This is done in a variety of ways, depending on the nature of
the vegetable. For instance, in order that baked beans may take the
place of meat entirely, fat in the form of salt pork is usually added
when they are prepared. The pork, of course, also supplies a very small
amount of protein, but it is not used with the beans for this purpose.
Practically all cooked vegetables are served with butter or with a sauce
that contains fat. Green vegetables that require no cooking but are
served as a salad, are supplied with fat by the salad dressing that is
used with them. The fat varies greatly, depending on the kind of
dressing used.  14. CARBOHYDRATES IN VEGETABLES.--When the composition
of vegetables is considered chemically, the most striking thing about
them is the carbohydrates they contain. It is this that distinguishes
this class of foods from animal foods. The carbohydrate of vegetables is
found in both its forms, starch and sugar. It is in the form of sugar in
many of the vegetables when they are young or immature, but it turns
into starch as they mature. This change can be easily observed in the
case of peas. As is well known, young green peas are rather sweet
because of the sugar they contain, while mature or dried peas have lost
their sweetness and are starchy. The sugar that is found in large
quantities in such vegetables as peas, carrots, turnips, etc. is largely
cane sugar. The starch that vegetables contain occurs in tiny granules,
just as it is found in cereals, and is affected by cooking in the same
way. The mature vegetables in which the starch has developed, although
less tender and less sweet than young ones, have a higher food value. In
fact, the carbohydrate that vegetables contain constitutes a large
proportion of their food value.

One of the chief sources of starch among vegetables is the potato, in
which the starch grains are large and, if properly cooked, easily
digested. Irish, or white, potatoes contain very little carbohydrate in
the form of sugar, but in the sweet potato much of the carbohydrate is
sugar. In either of these two forms--starch and sugar--vegetable
carbohydrate is easily digested.

15. MINERAL MATTER, OR ASH, IN VEGETABLES.--The mineral matter in
vegetables is found in comparatively large quantities, the average
amount being slightly over 1 per cent. The presence of this substance is
of great value, because the mineral salts of both fruits and vegetables
are essential in the diet of adults in order to keep their health in a
normal condition. The mineral salts of vegetables render the blood more
alkaline instead of more acid, as do those contained in cereals and
meat. A large number of vegetables, particularly those low in food
value, such as greens, celery, etc., are very valuable for their mineral
salts. In reality, this substance and the cellulose they contain are the
things that recommend the use of these vegetables in the diet. Minerals
of all kinds are found in solution in the water contained in vegetables,
but chief among them are calcium, sodium, iron, phosphorus, and sulphur.
Greens and salad vegetables are particularly high in iron, the element
that assists in keeping the blood in good condition. These minerals are
easily lost if the method of cookery is not planned to retain them.

16. CELLULOSE IN VEGETABLES.--The special use of cellulose, as has
already been learned, is to serve as bulk in the food containing it. In
vegetables, the cellulose varies greatly as to quantity, as well as to
texture and the amount that can be digested. In young vegetables, it is
very soft and perhaps digestible to a certain extent, but as they grow
older it hardens and they become tough. This fact is clearly
demonstrated in the case of beets. Those which are pulled from the
garden in the summer and cooked are tender and soft, but those which are
allowed to mature in the ground and are then put away for winter are,
when cooked in the late winter or early spring, so hard and tough that
it is almost impossible to make them soft. The quantity of cellulose
that vegetables contain therefore depends largely on their age and
condition. Those low in total food value contain, as a rule, larger
quantities of it than those high in food value. This is due to the fact
that both water and cellulose, which are usually found together in large
quantities, help to detract from the fuel, or food, value of foods.

Very young persons or those who are ill sometimes find it impossible to
take in its original form a vegetable that contains a large amount of
bulk, or cellulose. In such a case, the vegetable may be put through a
colander or a sieve in order to break up the cellulose and make it
easier to digest. Under ordinary conditions, cellulose should not be
avoided, but should be included in large quantities in the diet through
the vegetables that are consumed daily.

17. WATER IN VEGETABLES.--The majority of vegetables contain a large
quantity of water. Such vegetables as lettuce, cucumbers, tomatoes,
etc., which are low in total food value, contain the most water, the
average percentage being about 95. The dry vegetables, which are high in
food value, average only about 10 per cent. of water. The water that is
found in vegetables, whether it is much or little, is contained in
cell-like structures surrounded by cellulose, and it holds in solution
the mineral salts and much of the nutriment of the vegetables. In
addition, the water holds in solution to a certain extent the material
that gives vegetables their distinctive flavor. When any of this water
is lost in the preparation of vegetables, the substances that it
contains are also lost. It is therefore essential that correct methods
of preparation be chosen for the cooking of this food, so as to prevent
the waste of valuable food materials.

18. DIGESTIBILITY OF VEGETABLES.--The digestibility of vegetables is
largely an individual matter; that is, a vegetable that agrees with one
person may not agree with another. The fact that there appears to be no
apparent reason for such a condition would lead to the conclusion that
it is due to the peculiarities of the person. Because of this, it is not
fair to make the general statement that a particular vegetable is easy
to digest and another one is hard to digest.

The chief cause for difficulty in the digestion of vegetables lies in
their volatile oils, which give them their flavor, but which are
irritating to many persons. Vegetables having a strong flavor, such as
radishes, onions, cucumbers, cabbage, and cauliflower, are the ones that
disagree most frequently with persons who eat them; but sometimes the
way in which some of them are cooked has more to do with this than the
vegetables themselves.

Vegetables containing considerable cellulose and water do not of
themselves give trouble in digestion, because they contain practically
nothing to digest; but they are sometimes responsible for interfering
with the digestion of other foods. Vegetables that are extremely high in
starch, such as potatoes, are easily digested by most persons, provided
they are properly cooked. For instance, a plain baked potato is easily
digested, but the same potato sautéd in fat is more difficult of
digestion.

19. TABLE SHOWING COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF VEGETABLES.--As
vegetables vary considerably in the amount of the food substances they
contain, so do they differ greatly in their food value. This is clearly
shown in Table I, which gives the percentage of the food substances of
vegetables, as well as the food value per pound, in calories, that these
vegetables contain. The figures in this table are taken from Atwater's
Table of American Food Materials, and refer to the edible portion of the
material. In the case of several vegetables, no figures are given by
this authority, but in the table here presented the percentages and the
calories for the vegetables most similar are used. For example, the
figures for lettuce are used for endive, as the composition and food
value of this vegetable are not included and it resembles lettuce very
closely. Constant reference should be made to Table I as progress is
make with the study of vegetables and their preparation. Noting the
difference in the composition of the different vegetables, as well as
the variation in their food value, will be not only interesting but
instructive. For instance, when the housewife realizes that lettuce and
celery furnish only 85 to 90 calories to the pound, while dried beans
and peas average more than 1,700 calories to the pound, she will
understand better the place that these foods occupy in the dietary.

TABLE I

COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF VEGETABLES

                                                      Food Value
Vegetable           Water  Protein  Fat  Carbo- Ash   per Pound
                                        hydrate        Calories
----------------------------------------------------------------
Asparagus .......... 94.0    1.8     .2    3.3    .7      105
Beans
  Dried ............ 12.6   22.5    1.8   59.6   3.5    1,750
  Lima ............. 68.5    7.1     .7   22.0   1.7      570
  Shelled .......... 58.9    9.4     .6   29.1   2.0      740
  String ........... 89.2    2.3     .3    7.4    .8      195
Beets .............. 87.5    1.6     .1    9.7   1.1      215
Brussels sprouts ... 88.2    4.7    1.1    4.3   1.7      215
Cabbage ............ 91.5    1.6     .3    5.6   1.0      145
Carrots ............ 88.2    1.1     .4    9.3   1.0      210
Cauliflower ........ 92.3    1.8     .5    4.7    .7      140
Celery ............. 94.5    1.1     .1    3.3   1.0       85
Corn ............... 75.4    3.1    1.1   19.7    .7      470
Cucumbers .......... 95.4     .8     .2    3.1    .5       80
Eggplant ........... 92.9    1.2     .3    5.1    .5      130
French artichokes .. 92.5     .8     .2    5.0   1.5      110
Greens
  Dandelion ........ 81.4    2.4    1.0   10.6   4.6      285
  Endive ........... 94.7    1.2     .3    2.9    .9       90
  Spinach .......... 92.3    2.1     .3    3.2   2.1      110
  Swiss chard ...... 92.3    2.1     .3    3.2   2.1      110
  Lettuce .......... 94.7    1.2     .3    2.9    .9       90
  Watercress ....... 94.7    1.2     .3    2.9    .9       90
Jerusalem artichokes 79.5    2.6    2.0   16.7   1.0      365
Kohlrabi ........... 91.1    2.0     .1    5.5   1.3      145
Lentils, dried .....  8.4   25.7    1.0   59.2   5.7    1,620
Mushrooms .......... 88.1    3.5     .4    6.8   1.2      210
Okra ............... 90.2    1.6     .2    7.4    .6      175
Onions ............. 87.6    1.6     .3    9.9    .6      225
Parsnips ........... 83.0    1.6     .5   13.5   1.4      300
Peas
  Dried ............  9.5   24.6    1.0   62.0   2.9    1,655
  Green ............ 74.6    7.0     .5   16.9   1.0      465
Peppers ............ 92.9    1.2     .3    5.1    .5      130
Potatoes
  Irish ............ 78.3    2.2     .1   18.4   1.0      385
  Sweet ............ 69.0    1.8     .7   27.4   1.1      570
Radishes ........... 91.8    1.3     .1    5.8   1.0      135
Salsify ............ 88.2    1.1     .4    9.3   1.0      210
Squash
  Summer ........... 95.4     .8     .2    3.1    .5       80
  Winter ........... 88.3    1.4     .5    9.0    .8      215
Tomatoes ........... 94.3     .9     .4    3.9    .5      105
Turnips ............ 89.6    1.3     .2    8.1    .8      185
----------------------------------------------------------------



       *       *       *       *       *

PURCHASE AND CARE OF VEGETABLES

PURCHASE OF VEGETABLES

20. As in the case of other foods, the purchase of vegetables in the
market requires special knowledge and attention in order that the best
value may be obtained for the money expended. The housewife who has a
limited amount of money to spend for food does not buy wisely when she
purchases vegetables out of season or those which must be shipped long
distances. On the other hand, it will be found that vegetables bought in
season as well as those which are plentiful in the particular locality
in which they are sold, especially if they are perishable vegetables,
are lowest in price and are in the best condition for food. Therefore,
whether the income is limited or not, it is wisdom on the part of the
housewife to buy vegetables that grow in the neighboring region and to
purchase them when they are in season.

21. A very important point for the housewife to keep in mind regarding
the purchase of vegetables is that their price is determined not by
their value as food, but by their scarcity and the demand for them.
Take, for example, the case of mushrooms. As shown in Table I, this
vegetable is low in food value, containing only 210 calories to the
pound, but, if purchased, they are always an expensive food. The high
price asked for mushrooms is entirely dependent on their scarcity. If
there is much demand in a certain community for a food that is not
plentiful in the market, the price of that food always goes up. As in
the case of mushrooms, many expensive foods add practically nothing in
the way of nourishment, their only value being in the variety of flavor
they supply.

22. Furthermore, in order to provide wisely, the person who purchases
vegetables for the family should be able to judge whether she is getting
full value in food for the money she invests. She cannot always do this
with each particular vegetable purchased, but she can buy in such a way
that what she purchases will average correctly in this respect. The
perishable vegetables should be bought as fresh as possible. No
difficulty will be experienced in determining this, for they will soon
wither or rot if they are not fresh, but the point is to find out their
condition before they are bought. The housewife should be ever on the
alert and should examine carefully the vegetables she buys before they
are accepted from the grocer or taken from the market. In the case of
certain vegetables, it is possible to conceal the fact that they are
stale. For instance, the outside leaves of a head of lettuce or endive
are sometimes removed and only the bleached center is offered for sale;
but this always indicates that the outside leaves were either withered
or spoiled or they would not have been taken off.

23. Much of the spoiling of vegetables can be avoided if proper
attention is given to them in the market. Food of this kind should be so
displayed that it is not exposed to the dirt and dust of the street, nor
to flies and other destructive vermin. The practice of displaying
vegetables on a stand in front of a store is gradually losing favor with
the housewife who understands the sanitary precautions that should be
taken with foods. On the other hand, housewives owe it to the merchant
not to handle the foods they are going to buy, for the handling of them
not only injures them so that they will not keep well, but renders them
unfit to be accepted by the next purchaser.

24. The manner in which vegetables are sold should also receive
consideration. It has been the custom to sell them by measure, but both
housewives and merchants have come to realize that it is fairer to sell
them by weight. Experience has shown that a pound is much more likely to
be always uniform than is a quart or a peck. This is due to the fact
that no two dealers are likely to measure in exactly the same way, even
though the measures they use are up to the standard in size. Then, too,
especially in the case of vegetables that are of various sizes and
shapes, it is impossible to fill a measure properly because of the shape
of the vegetables, and so either the housewife often receives short
measure or the merchant gives more than the measure requires. All
difficulty of this kind is entirely overcome when vegetables
are weighed.

 CARE OF VEGETABLES

25. PERISHABLE VEGETABLES, that is, those which spoil quickly, are
usually bought in small quantities, and so are used up quickly. However,
if they are kept on hand for only a day or so, they require a definite
amount of care in order to insure the most satisfactory results in their
use. To prevent them from spoiling or withering, they should be kept in
a cool, damp place until they are needed. The most effective and
convenient way in which to accomplish this is to store them in a
refrigerator or other similar device. If ice cannot be obtained, the
cellar should be utilized. Before vegetables of this kind are put away
after being delivered from the market, they should be looked over
carefully, and any that are spoiled should be discarded in order to
prevent others that they might touch from becoming tainted. As little
handling as possible, however, is advantageous, because when such foods
become bruised and are then allowed to stand they are likely to spoil
very quickly.

26. The less perishable vegetables, commonly called WINTER VEGETABLES
because they may be kept through the winter, may be bought in quantity,
provided proper storage facilities to prevent them from spoiling are
available. Potatoes, in particular, are usually purchased in this way,
for, as a rule, they may be obtained at a better price than when bought
in small quantities, and then, too, they are a vegetable that most
families use nearly every day. If they are bought in quantity, they
should first be thoroughly tested, for often a potato looks very well on
the outside while its texture and flavor may not be at all in accordance
with its appearance. Great care should also be exercised to see that
this vegetable, as well as carrots, turnips, parsnips, etc., has not
been frosted, for frost ruins them as to texture and keeping qualities.

All such vegetables as these, provided they must be stored for any
length of time, keep best in a cold, fairly dry atmosphere. To prevent
them from sprouting, the storage room should, if possible, be kept dark,
but in case they do sprout, the sprouts should be removed as soon as
they are discovered. The best receptacles for the storage of these
winter vegetables are bins, a convenient type of which is shown in
_Essentials of Cookery_, Part 2, and the most satisfactory place in
which to put such bins is a cellar that has a dirt floor rather than a
board or a cement floor.

 CLASSIFICATION OF VEGETABLES

27. Because of their difference in physical structure, both as plants or
parts of plants, and their variation in chemical composition, it is a
rather difficult matter to classify vegetables. The vegetables that are
discussed throughout these Sections are therefore not included in any
classes, but are arranged alphabetically, a plan that the housewife will
find very convenient. However, there are a few general classes whose
names and characteristics should be known by the housewife, for an
understanding of them will enable her to make a more intelligent use of
this food. These classes, together with a brief description of the
features that characterize them and the names by which the principal
varieties are known, are here given.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

28. SUCCULENT VEGETABLES are those which are generally eaten for their
appetizing effect and their value as a source of mineral salts and bulk.
These vegetables, which get their name from the fact that they are juicy
in texture, include the greens, such as spinach, Swiss chard, dandelion,
lettuce, etc., also celery, asparagus, cabbage, and all other plants
whose green leaves and stems are edible. Succulent vegetables may be
cooked, but they are often used as cold relishes or in the making
of salads.

29. ROOT, TUBER, and BULB VEGETABLES form another class. Examples of
several well-known roots are shown in Fig. 1, which from left to right
are salsify, carrots, turnips, and parsnips. The varieties included in
this class are closely related as to food value, and on the whole
average much higher in this characteristic than do the succulent
vegetables. Irish potatoes and Jerusalem artichokes are examples of
tubers; sweet potatoes, beets, radishes, etc., in addition to the
vegetables shown in Fig. 1, belong to the roots; and onions and all the
vegetables related to the onion, such as garlic, shallots, and leeks,
are illustrations of bulbs or enlarged underground stems.

30. FRUIT and FLOWER VEGETABLES form a third class. They present great
variety in appearance, structure, and composition. To this class belong
cucumbers, eggplant, winter and summer squash, vegetable marrow,
tomatoes, peppers, and okra, which are in reality fruits but are used as
vegetables. Flower vegetables include California, or French, artichokes,
and cauliflower, all of which are in reality the buds of flowers or
plants and are eaten for food.

31. LEGUMES form a fourth class of vegetables, and they include all the
varieties of beans, peas, and lentils. When these foods are mature and
dried, they have the highest food value of all the vegetables. Among the
beans are Lima beans, kidney beans, navy, or soup, beans, soy beans, and
many others. The peas include the various garden varieties that have
been allowed to mature, cow-peas, and many others, some of which are not
suitable for human consumption. The lentils occur in numerous varieties,
too, but those commonly used are the red, yellow, and black ones. To
legumes also belong peanuts, but as they are seldom used as vegetables
in cookery, no further mention is made of them in this Section.

       *       *       *       *       *

VARIETIES OF VEGETABLES AND THEIR PREPARATION

GENERAL METHODS OF PREPARATION AND COOKING

32. PREPARING VEGETABLES FOR COOKING.--Before many vegetables can be
cooked, they require a certain amount of preparation, such as washing,
soaking, peeling, cutting up into suitable sizes, etc. When they must be
peeled, great care should be taken not to remove too much of the
vegetable with the skin. Whenever it is possible to do so, vegetables
should be cooked in their skins, as there is much less waste of edible
material if the skins are removed after cooking. Potatoes that are to be
fried, hashed brown, or used for salad and other similar dishes may be
boiled in their skins and peeled afterwards just as conveniently as to
be peeled first and then boiled. Indeed, this plan is strongly
recommended, for it not only saves material that is removed in the
peeling but also conserves the mineral salts and the soluble food
material, much of which is lost in the water during the cooking.

33. If it is desired to remove the peeling before cooking, it will be
found more economical to put the vegetables in water and then scrape off
the skins than to cut them off with a knife. This method is especially
satisfactory with new potatoes and with such vegetables as carrots,
parsnips, salsify, and turnips. The scraping can be accomplished more
easily if the vegetables are first plunged into boiling water for a few
minutes and then dipped into cold water.

When entire heads of such vegetables as cabbage, cauliflower, Brussels
sprouts, etc. are to be cooked, they should be soaked, head down, for at
least 1/2 hour in salted water made by adding 1 teaspoon-full of salt to
1 quart of water. This is done in order to remove any bugs or worms that
may be lodged in the head. The correct proportion of salt is an
important detail of this process, for if salt water that is too strong
is used, it will kill the bugs or worms and they will remain in the
head.  34. METHODS OF COOKING APPLIED TO VEGETABLES.--The usual methods
of cooking applied to vegetables are boiling, steaming, baking, stewing,
frying, sautéing, broiling, and roasting. Which one of these to select
depends, of course, on the particular kind of vegetable that is to be
cooked and the result that is desired, but, if possible, an effort
should be made to select an economical method. Starchy vegetables, such
as Irish and sweet potatoes, beans, etc., develop a more delicious
flavor when they are baked than when they are cooked by any other method
of preparation. Steaming is an excellent means of preparing vegetables
that must be cooked by moist heat, especially when it is desired that no
soluble material be lost, as is often the case in boiling. Frying and
sautéing, when applied to vegetables, usually produce a delicious
flavor, but often render the vegetables decidedly indigestible. For this
reason, vegetables so prepared should seldom if ever be served to
children and to persons whose digestion is not good.

35. EFFECT OF COOKING ON VEGETABLES.--The various ways in which cooking
affects vegetables should be thoroughly understood by the housewife. In
the first place, some methods conserve the food material whereas others
waste it. For instance, boiling in water, which is probably one of the
most common ways of cooking vegetables, is decidedly advantageous in
some respects, but the water dissolves much of the soluble material,
such as mineral salts, sugar, etc., found in the vegetables, so that
unless some use is made of this water in the cooking of other foods,
considerable waste results. On the other hand, steaming and baking
permit no loss of food material, and so they should be applied to
vegetables whenever it is desired to conserve food substances.

36. The flavors of vegetables are greatly changed during the process of
cooking, being increased in some cases and decreased in others. In the
case of such strongly flavored vegetables as cabbage, cauliflower,
onions, etc., it is advisable to dissipate part of the flavor. Therefore
such vegetables should be cooked in an open vessel in order that the
flavor may be decreased by evaporation. Vegetables mild in flavor,
however, are improved by being cooked in a closed vessel, for all their
flavor should be retained. The overcooking of vegetables is sometimes
responsible for an increase of a disagreeable flavor.  37. Another
feature of vegetables often changed by cooking is their color. For
instance, green vegetables do not, upon cooking, always remain green. In
many cases, the color may be improved by adding a very small quantity of
soda to the water in which the vegetables are cooked. Attention should
also be given to the length of time vegetables are subjected to heat,
for the overboiling of some vegetables is liable to develop an
unattractive color in them. This is particularly the case with cabbage,
cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts, which develop not only a strong,
disagreeable flavor but also a reddish color when cooked too long.

38. The application of heat to vegetables also has a definite effect on
them. By sufficient cooking, the cellulose of vegetables is softened to
the extent that it is less irritating and much more likely to be partly
digested than that of raw vegetables. The acids of fruits increase upon
cooking, and so the acidity of vegetables is increased to a certain
extent. Vegetables that contain starch are rendered digestible in no
other way than by cooking. On the other hand, the protein material of
this food is coagulated by the application of heat, just as the white of
an egg or the tissue of meat is coagulated and hardened. However,
cooking is the only means of softening the cellulose that surrounds
this material.

Still, high-protein foods, such as beans, peas, and lentils, can be much
improved if they are cooked in water that is not very hard. The lime in
hard water has a tendency to harden them to the extent that they require
a much longer time to cook than when soft water is used. These
vegetables may be still further softened by the addition of a small
quantity of soda to the water in which they are cooked, but care should
be taken not to use too much soda, as it will injure the flavor. When
soda is used, the vegetable should be parboiled for 10 or 15 minutes in
the soda water and then drained and cooked in fresh water. This method,
of course, does not apply to vegetables that are cooked in soda water to
retain their color.

39. Salt is always added in the cooking of vegetables to season them. In
the use of salt, two important points must be borne in mind: first, that
it has the effect of hardening the tissues of the vegetable in much the
same manner as it hardens the tissues of meat; and, secondly, that it
helps to draw out the flavor of the vegetables. These two facts
determine largely the time for adding the salt. If an old, tough,
winter vegetable is to be prepared, it should be cooked until nearly
soft in water that contains no salt, and the salt should be added just
before the cooking is finished. When it is desired to draw out the
flavor, as, for instance, when vegetables are cooked for soup or stews,
the salt should be supplied when the vegetables are put on to cook.
Young tender vegetables may be cooked in salt water, but as such water
extracts a certain amount of flavor, an effort should be made to use it
in the preparation of stews, sauces, and soups.


SAUCES FOR VEGETABLES

40. Vegetables may, of course, be served plain, but they are greatly
improved in flavor, nutritive value, and often in appearance by the
addition of a well-seasoned sauce. Numerous sauces are used for this
purpose, the one to select depending somewhat on the vegetable, the
method of cooking employed, and the flavor that is desired. Recipes for
the sauces found to be most satisfactory are here given. It will be well
to practice the making of these, so as to become familiar with them and
thus know just what sauce is meant when reference is made to a
particular sauce in the recipes for vegetables. The quantities given in
the recipes for sauces will make sufficient sauce to dress the
vegetables required for four to six persons. White sauce, which is
probably the one that is used oftenest, may be made in various
thicknesses, as has been explained previously. However, the medium white
sauce has been found to be the one most nearly correct for vegetables
and consequently the one most preferred.

MEDIUM WHITE SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. milk

Melt the butter and add the flour, salt, and pepper. Pour into this the
milk, which has been previously heated, and cook together until the
flour thickens completely. Pour over the vegetable, from which the water
has been previously drained, and serve.

VEGETABLE SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1/2 c. milk
1/2 c. water in which vegetable was cooked

Melt the butter, add the flour, salt, and pepper, and pour into this
the heated liquids. Cook until the mixture thickens. Pour over the
drained vegetable and serve hot.

DRAWN-BUTTER SAUCE

1/4 c. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. hot water

Melt the butter, add the flour, salt, and pepper, and pour into this the
hot water. Boil for a few minutes and serve.

HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

1/3 c. butter
1 Tb. flour
1/4 tsp. salt
1/2 c. boiling water
1 egg yolk
2 Tb. vinegar or lemon juice

Melt the butter, add the flour, salt, and water, and cook until the
mixture thickens. While still hot, pour over the slightly beaten egg
yolk, beating constantly to prevent curding. Add the vinegar or lemon
juice. Serve with vegetables that have been boiled in salt water.

SOUR-CREAM DRESSING

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
3/4 c. milk or sweet cream
1/4 c. vinegar

Melt the butter and add the flour, salt, and pepper. Pour into this the
heated milk or cream, and allow the sauce to thicken. Then add the
vinegar, stirring rapidly, and serve hot.

TOMATO SAUCE

1-1/2 c. stewed tomatoes
1 slice onion
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Heat the tomatoes with the onion and force through a sieve. Melt the
butter, add the flour, salt, pepper, and the strained tomatoes. Cook
together until thick, remove, and serve hot with a vegetable.

MAÎTRE D'HÔTEL SAUCE

1/3 c. butter
1 Tb. chopped parsley
2 Tb. lemon juice
1/4 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Melt the butter and add the chopped parsley, lemon juice, salt, and
pepper. Mix well, and allow the whole to boil, but not to brown. Pour
over the vegetable and serve.

PARSLEY-BUTTER SAUCE

1/2 c. butter
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Heat the butter in a saucepan until it is well browned, and then add
the parsley, salt, and pepper. Allow the sauce to become hot, but not to
boil. This is an excellent sauce to use over new potatoes or diced
vegetables, such as turnips or carrots.


ASPARAGUS AND ITS PREPARATION

41. ASPARAGUS is a vegetable that consists of the shoots of the plant,
which are eaten before the blossoms develop. It grows quickly and is
very tender if the shoots are clipped at just the right time after they
appear above the ground. It comes early in the spring, being about the
first green vegetable that gets into the local market, but its season is
comparatively short. It does not keep long after it is purchased and is
better when it is used at once. If asparagus must be kept for any length
of time, it should be stored in a cool, damp place.

42. In selecting asparagus, it should be remembered that there are two
varieties, one of which is green and the other white. The stems of the
green asparagus should be green to the bottom, and should not be hard
nor woody where they are cut from the plant. However, if a part of the
stems is found to be woody, the hard ends should not be rejected, for
the outside may be peeled off and the center used, or the hard ends may
be cooked with other vegetables for the making of soup. The white
asparagus will have slightly green tips, while the rest of the stem
will be white.

Asparagus is one of the succulent vegetables comparatively low in food
value. It contains, as Table I shows, only one-fourth as many calories
to the pound as potatoes. Its food value, however, may be increased by
dressing it with butter after the vegetable has been cooked or by
serving with it a sauce made with milk, butter, flour, etc. Then, too,
asparagus is sometimes served on toast, which is another means of making
a more nutritious dish out of this vegetable.

In its composition, asparagus contains a _diuretic_, that is, a
substance that has an effect upon the kidneys, and that is known as
_asparagine_. Because of the presence of this substance, asparagus is
thought to be injurious to those who have kidney trouble, but it need
not be avoided except in some forms of this disease.  43. PREPARATION
FOR COOKING.--To prepare asparagus for cooking, strip the tiny scales
from the sides of the stems by means of a small paring knife. These hold
sand and are responsible for the presence of the grit that is sometimes
found in a cooked dish of asparagus even when the housewife feels
certain that she has washed it as clean as possible. Then wash the stems
thoroughly in several cold waters, lifting them out of the water after
each washing instead of pouring the water off of them. If the water is
poured off the stems, the sand that has been washed from them is likely
to remain in the bottom of the pan and mix with the vegetable again.

When the asparagus has been sufficiently washed, it may be used in the
full lengths or cut into pieces of any desired length, 1 inch being the
size that is usually preferred. If stems are to be cooked whole, it is a
good plan to form them into a bunch as when purchased and tie the bunch
with a tape or a string. When this is done, the string should, of
course, be cut and removed before the asparagus is served. A point to
remember about the preparation of this vegetable is that it should
always be cooked in boiling, salted water.

44. ASPARAGUS WITH BUTTER DRESSING.--Perhaps the simplest way in which
to prepare asparagus is to cook it in salted water and then serve it
with a butter dressing. When prepared in this way, it may be served
plain, but it becomes more attractive, as well as more nutritious, if it
is placed on squares of toast.

For this dish, secure a bunch of fresh, tender asparagus, wash it
thoroughly, and then, as desired, cut it into inch lengths or allow it
to remain whole. Pour enough boiling water over it to cover well, add
salt in the proportion of 1 teaspoonful to each quart of water, and
allow it to cook until the stems may be easily pierced with a fork,
which in most cases will require not more than from 10 to 15 minutes.
The length of the cooking is an important factor with this vegetable,
for when it is overcooked its flavor is not so agreeable as when it has
had just enough cooking. When the asparagus is done, drain off the
water, season with a little more salt and a dash of pepper, and, if it
is to be served without toast, add 1 tablespoonful of butter for each
bunch cooked, allowing the butter to melt. In case it is to be served on
toast, allow a small amount of the liquid in which it was cooked to
remain on it, add the butter to this, and, after placing several of the
stems or a number of the pieces on the squares of toast, dip a little of
the liquid over all.  45. CREAMED ASPARAGUS ON TOAST.--A still more
nutritious dish can be prepared from asparagus by combining it with a
cream sauce and serving it on toast. The sauce supplies protein and fat
and the toast furnishes carbohydrate, substances in which this vegetable
is low. Numerous ways of serving this combination may be resorted to,
but one of the most attractive methods is illustrated in Fig. 2. As here
shown, a small bunch of the stems is slipped through a ring of toast cut
by means of round cutters of two sizes. If it is not desired to use
toast for this, a ring of lemon rind or pimiento may be substituted, or
the ring may be omitted altogether and the stems merely laid in an
orderly manner on a square of toast. Also, with this dish, as with the
previous one, the asparagus may be cut into inch lengths instead of
being cooked whole.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

To prepare creamed asparagus, clean it in the manner explained in Art.
43. Then either cut it into inch lengths or allow the stems to remain
whole, and cook it in enough boiling salted water to cover it well.
While the asparagus is cooking, prepare a medium white sauce. As soon as
the asparagus has cooked enough to be pierced with a fork, pour off the
water and serve with the sauce in any of the ways already suggested. If
the asparagus is left whole, the sauce is poured over it after it is
placed on the toast, but when it is cut into small pieces, it is usually
combined with the sauce and the creamed vegetable then poured over
the toast.

46. SCALLOPED ASPARAGUS.--Another nutritious dish with asparagus as its
base is scalloped asparagus. This involves all the ingredients used in
creamed asparagus, but to give it still more food value, cheese is
also added.

SCALLOPED ASPARAGUS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 bunch asparagus
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 c. asparagus stock
1/2 c. milk
1/4 tsp. salt
1 c. buttered cracker crumbs
1/2 c. grated cheese

Clean the asparagus according to the directions given in Art. 43. Cut
it into inch lengths and cook in boiling salted water until it is tender
enough to be pierced with a fork, and then drain. Prepare a sauce by
melting the butter, adding the flour, and pouring into this mixture the
heated stock and milk seasoned with the salt. Put a layer of the
buttered crumbs in the bottom of a baking dish, and pour half the
asparagus over them. Sprinkle the asparagus with one-third the cheese
and add another layer of crumbs. Sprinkle this with one-third the
cheese. Add the remainder of the asparagus and the crumbs and sprinkle
the rest of the cheese on top. Pour the sauce over the entire mixture,
place in the oven, and bake until heated thoroughly and the top is
slightly browned. Serve from the baking dish.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEANS AND THEIR PREPARATION

VARIETIES OF BEANS

47. Of all the vegetables commonly used for food, BEANS afford the
greatest variety. However, there are two principal classes into which
all varieties of this vegetable can be placed, namely, _string beans_
and _shell beans_. String beans include both the pods and the seeds, and
are used when the beans are very young. Shell beans consist of the
seeds, which are allowed to mature either partly or entirely and are
taken from the shells before cooking. Those which are partly developed
are cooked when they are fresh, but the ones that are allowed to mature
completely are dried and then stored for use at any time during the
year. In some cases, the same variety of beans may be used in the three
ways mentioned, while in others certain kinds are raised expressly for
one of these purposes.

48. The food value of beans increases as they mature, as will be
observed upon reference to Table I. The very young beans, that is, the
string beans, which include the pods and all, are comparatively low in
food value, being only a little higher than asparagus. To increase the
food value of these, fat meat, butter, or other fat is supplied in their
cooking, or milk or a cream sauce is added before they are served. Fresh
shell beans have much more nutriment than string beans, whereas dried
beans are very high in food value. It is this characteristic of dried
shell beans that makes them a very good meat substitute.

 STRING BEANS

49. VARIETIES OF STRING BEANS.--There are two general varieties of
string beans: the yellow ones, which are commonly known as _wax beans_,
and the green ones, which are the ones usually meant when the term
string beans is used. Numerous varieties exist among these classes, and
some are very much better than others. Many of them have strings, but
others are stringless and consequently are easier to prepare. Whatever
kind is used should be picked from the vines before the beans are old
enough for the pods to develop woody fibers. Otherwise they will not be
palatable, for when they have reached this stage it will be impossible
to cook them soft.

50. SELECTION AND CARE.--Small, round, rusty-looking spots are common to
both string and wax beans; but when such spots are present they must be
removed before cooking. As there is considerable waste in the
preparation of such beans for the table, it is wise in buying string
beans to select those whose surface is not marred with such blemishes.
In addition, the beans should be as fresh as can be obtained and crisp
and tender enough to snap when the pods are bent in half. Proper
attention should be given to them after they are purchased, too. If
possible, they should be cooked immediately, but if this cannot be done
they should be kept in a cool, damp place to prevent them from becoming
limp. However, if they wilt before they can be cooked, they may be
freshened by allowing them to stand in cold water for a short time.

51. PREPARATION AND COOKING.--To prepare beans for cooking, wash them
thoroughly in cold water. If the beans are of the stringless variety,
cut off the stem and blossom ends; but, in case they have strings, break
the ends and strip off the strings together with the ends, as shown in
Fig. 3. The beans may then be cooked whole or cut into inch lengths
before cooking. If it is desired to cut them, the most convenient way is
to place them in an orderly heap on a cutting board and then cut a
handful at a time, drawing a sharp knife across them as they are held on
the board. Any imperfect portions should be removed before cutting.

52. The cooking of string beans is similar to that of asparagus, except
that they require longer cooking. Put them, either whole or cut into a
kettle, cover them with boiling water to which has been added 1
teaspoonful of salt to each quart of water, and cook them with the cover
on the kettle until they can be easily pierced with a fork. The length
of time required to cook them depends on the age of the beans, but
usually from 30 minutes to 1 hour will be sufficient. When they are
done, drain the water from them, but save it to make sauce for them or
to add to soup stock.

53. STRING BEANS IN BUTTER.--String beans, which, of course, include wax
beans, may be served with a sauce of some kind, but they are very
appetizing when merely drained after cooking and served with
melted butter.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

To prepare beans in this manner, wash the desired amount, remove the
ends and strings, if necessary, and cut into inch lengths. Cook until
they are tender and then pour off the water. Add 1 tablespoonful of
butter for each four persons to be served, a dash of pepper, and, if
they are not salty enough, a little more salt. Allow the butter to melt
and serve the beans hot.

54. STRING BEANS WITH SALT PORK.--Those who like the flavor of salt pork
will find string beans cooked with a small piece of this meat very
appetizing. Besides improving the flavor, salt pork supplies the beans
with fat, a food substance in which they are very low.

After washing the beans that are to be cooked in this way, remove the
ends and strings, but do not cut into inch lengths. Put the whole beans
to cook in boiling water and add 1/4 pound of pork for a sufficient
amount of beans for four persons. Cook until the beans are tender, and
serve with the pork without removing from the liquid.

55. CREAMED STRING BEANS.--Perhaps the most popular way in which to
prepare string or wax beans is to cream them. Not only an appetizing
dish, but one whose food value is increased, is the result. The cream
sauce served with the beans may be made entirely of milk, but a very
satisfactory sauce can be made by using half milk or cream and half
liquid in which the beans were cooked. To prepare creamed beans, clean
the beans in the usual way and cut them into inch lengths. Put them to
cook in boiling salted water and cook until they may be easily pierced
with a fork. Pour off the water, but keep it to use in the dressing. To
dress a sufficient quantity of beans for four persons, a sauce should be
made as follows:

SAUCE FOR CREAMED STRING BEANS

1 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
1/4 tsp. salt
Pinch of pepper
1/3 c. rich milk or cream
1/3 c. liquid from beans

Melt the butter in a saucepan and add the flour, salt, and pepper. Pour
in the heated liquids and stir until the mixture is smooth and
thoroughly cooked. Add the sauce to the beans, heat together, and serve.

56. STRING BEANS WITH SOUR DRESSING.--A dish having an entirely
different flavor from those already explained is produced when beans are
served with a sour dressing.

To prepare beans in this way, clean a sufficient number according to the
directions already given and cut them into inch lengths. Cook them in
boiling salted water until they are tender. Pour off the water, but
retain 1/2 cupful for the dressing. Make the following sauce, which will
dress a sufficient quantity of beans for four persons:

SOUR DRESSING

2 Tb. ham or bacon fat
1 Tb. flour
1/4 c. vinegar
1/2 c. liquid from beans

Melt the fat in a double boiler, add the flour, and into this stir the
vinegar and the liquid from the beans. Cook until the mixture thickens
and pour over the beans. Reheat and serve.


SHELL BEANS

57. VARIETIES AND FOOD VALUE OF SHELL BEANS.--When beans have matured on
the vines to such an extent that the pods are no longer tender enough
for human consumption, they are picked and the seeds then used for food.
Some are picked before the seeds have entirely matured, and these, which
must be young enough to contain considerable moisture, are cooked
fresh; others are allowed to mature entirely and are then dried before
they are cooked. After being dried, beans keep indefinitely and require
no care in storage except that they must not become moist. Numerous
varieties of both fresh and dried shell beans are in use, including
navy, marrowfat, pinto, and Lima beans.

58. Fresh shell beans average about three times as much food value as
string or wax beans. Most of this is carbohydrate in the form of starch,
but they also contain considerable protein. Dried shell beans, which are
entirely different in flavor and texture from fresh ones, contain still
more nutriment, their food value being more than twice that of fresh
shell beans and over four times that of potatoes. In the entirely
matured bean, which, as has already been mentioned, belongs to the class
of vegetables called legumes, the high food value is due to the high
percentage of starch and the large amount of protein in the form of
legumin, a substance that is an important substitute for other more
expensive protein foods. This composition reveals at once the fact that
dried shell beans make an excellent food, provided some fat is added to
them in their preparation.

59. PREPARATION AND COOKING OF FRESH SHELL BEANS.--With the exception of
Lima beans, most of the varieties of fresh shell beans are placed on the
market in the pods and must be shelled after they are purchased. Green
Lima beans, however, are usually sold shelled. If the beans are
purchased in the pods, wash them in cold water before shelling, but if
they are bought shelled, wash the shelled beans. Then put them to cook
in sufficient boiling water to which has been added 1 teaspoonful of
salt for each quart. Allow the beans to cook until they may be easily
pierced with a fork. The cooking will probably require from 45 minutes
to 1-1/2 hours, depending on the age and variety of the beans.

60. SHELL BEANS DRESSED WITH BUTTER.--Any variety of fresh shell beans
may be prepared according to the accompanying recipe, but Lima beans are
especially delicious when cooked in this way.

Prepare and cook the beans as directed in Art. 59. When they are
sufficiently cooked, pour off the water, season with additional salt, if
necessary, and a dash of pepper, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter for
each four persons to be served. Allow the butter to melt and serve the
beans hot.  61. SHELL BEANS IN CREAM.--Fresh shell beans are especially
appetizing when they are dressed with cream. Besides improving the
flavor, cream also adds considerable food value, an item that should not
be overlooked.

For this dish, prepare and cook the beans in the manner explained in
Art. 59. When they are tender, pour off the water and season with
additional salt and pepper. Then for each four persons to be served, add
1 tablespoonful of butter and 1/2 cupful of thin cream. Heat the beans
well in the cream and serve.

62. BEAN PURÉE.--Persons with whom the coarse skins that must
necessarily be eaten with beans disagree, find bean purée very
satisfactory. To prepare it, clean and cook the beans in boiling salted
water according to the directions given in Art. 59. Then pour off the
water and force the beans through a ricer or a sieve. Add sufficient
butter, salt, and pepper to season well and serve hot.

63. COOKING OF DRIED SHELL BEANS.--Before dried shell beans of any
variety are cooked, look them over very carefully, reject any that are
unfit for use, and wash the rest in cold water. They may then be cooked
without further preparation, but in order to hasten their cooking and
save fuel in their preparation, it is a good plan to moisten them by
soaking them in water before cooking. If they are to be soaked, place
them in cold water and allow them to remain there for 8 to 12 hours.
Then put them on to cook in water to which has been added a small pinch
of soda. Parboil the beans in this water until the outside skin begins
to crack and then pour off the water. While it is true that a certain
amount of mineral salts and perhaps a small percentage of food value are
lost in this procedure, because the water that is poured off is too
strong to be used for any other purpose, the improvement in the flavor
warrants any loss that might occur. After pouring off the water, wash
the beans in cold water, add fresh water to continue the cooking, and
allow the beans to simmer slowly until they are cooked soft enough to
crush between the fingers, but still retain their original shape.
Nothing is gained by cooking them rapidly on a hot fire, and
considerable fuel is wasted by this practice.

The fireless cooker and the double boiler are excellent utensils for the
cooking of dried beans, because they cook the beans at a temperature
below boiling point. They therefore cook the beans soft with little
difficulty and prevent the protein from becoming hard. The theory of the
cooking of protein--that is, the higher the temperature, the harder the
coagulation--applies in the cooking of dried beans, just as it does in
the cooking of eggs or milk.

64. STEWED NAVY BEANS.--The common small white beans are called _navy
beans_ from the fact that they are much used in the navy. These may be
prepared in various ways, but the simplest method is to stew them. In
the preparation of this dish, as well as any other made from dried
beans, it will be well to remember that 1/2 cupful of beans is usually
sufficient to serve four persons when they are cooked.

Look over the required amount of beans, reject any that are imperfect,
wash thoroughly, and put to soak overnight in cold water. Pour off any
water that remains, cover well with boiling water, and add a pinch of
soda. Cook slowly until the skins begin to burst. Pour off the water,
add fresh hot water and 1 teaspoonful of salt for each quart of water,
and allow to simmer until the beans may be easily crushed between the
fingers. During this process, the water should cook down until just a
sufficient amount to serve with the beans remains. When this is
accomplished, add 1-1/2 tablespoonfuls of butter, a dash of pepper, and,
if necessary, additional salt. Instead of the butter, ham or bacon fat
may be used for seasoning, or a small piece of ham or salt pork may be
cooked with the beans and the fat omitted. Serve the beans hot.

65. LIMA BEANS IN CREAM.--Dried Lima beans, when combined with thin
cream, make a very appetizing dish. To prepare them in this way, clean,
soak, and cook them as explained in Art. 63. When they are soft enough
to crush easily between the fingers and the water has boiled down so
that practically none remains, add 1/2 cupful of thin cream to a
sufficient quantity for four persons. Allow the beans to simmer for a
short time in the cream, add additional salt and a dash of pepper for
flavoring, and serve.

66. LIMA BEANS EN CASSEROLE.--While the small varieties of dried beans
are more commonly baked than the larger ones, Lima beans will be found
especially delicious when prepared in a casserole.

LIMA BEANS EN CASSEROLE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. dried Lima beans
1/4 c. ham or bacon fat
2 c. milk
2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper

Soak the beans overnight and then parboil them in soda water. Drain off
the water and turn the beans into a baking dish. Add the fat, milk,
salt, and pepper. Cover the dish and bake until the beans are soft.
Serve hot from the casserole.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

67. LIMA-BEAN LOAF.--If a dish that is not only appetizing, but
sufficient in food value to be used as a meat substitute, is desired,
Lima-bean loaf, which is illustrated in Fig. 4, should be selected. This
is very good when served alone, but it becomes more attractive and at
the same time more palatable when a sauce or gravy is added.

LIMA-BEAN LOAF
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. dried Lima beans
2 c. bread crumbs
Milk to moisten crumbs
2 eggs
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1/2 tsp. celery salt
2 Tb. butter

Soak the beans overnight and parboil them in soda water. Pour off this
water, cook until tender in boiling salted water, and then drain.
Moisten the bread crumbs slightly with milk, mix them with the beans,
and add the beaten eggs and seasoning. When the entire mixture is well
blended, place in a loaf pan, dot the top with the butter, and bake in
the oven until nicely browned and quite firm. Turn out on a platter,
garnish with parsley, and serve by cutting it into slices, as shown
in Fig. 4.

68. BEAN SOUFFLÉ.--Probably the daintiest dish that can be made from
dried beans is bean soufflé. This is equally suitable as the main dish
for a luncheon or a home dinner. One point to remember about it is that
it should be served immediately, for soufflé usually settles when taken
from the oven.

BEAN SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. bean pulp
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/4 tsp. celery salt
1 Tb. onion juice
2 eggs

Make the bean pulp by forcing well-cooked beans through a colander or a
press. Add all the seasoning and the beaten egg yolks. Beat the egg
whites stiff and fold them into the mixture. When well blended, pour
into a greased baking dish, or individual dishes, place in a pan
containing hot water, and bake in a moderate oven until the soufflé is
set, which will require from 30 to 45 minutes. Test by tapping slightly
with the finger. If the dent thus made in the soufflé springs back, it
is sufficiently baked. Remove from the oven and serve at once.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

69. BAKED BEANS.--Almost any kind of dried beans may be used for baking.
Some persons prefer the small navy beans, which are mentioned in this
recipe, whereas others like the larger marrowfat beans or Lima beans.
Pinto beans have for some time been taking the place of navy beans, and
are found to be a very good substitute. To bake beans successfully, a
dish with a tight-fitting cover, such as the one shown in Fig. 5, is
required. This is made of heavy glass, but if such a utensil is not
available, very satisfactory results can be obtained by using a heavy
earthen bowl, crock, or baking dish. To produce the delicious flavor
that is agreeable to most persons, beans should be baked a long time.
Therefore, as considerable heat is consumed in their cooking, it is a
wise plan to prepare more than enough for one meal. They may be served
the second time as baked beans, or, if this is not desired, they may be
used for various other purposes.

BAKED BEANS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 pt. navy beans
2 Tb. molasses
2 tsp. salt
1/2 lb. bacon or salt pork

Soak the beans overnight, parboil in soda water, and drain. Add a
sufficient amount of water to cover the beans well, cook until they
break open, and then pour with the liquid into a baking dish. If this
liquid does not almost cover the beans, add more until it comes nearly
to the top. Add the molasses and salt, cut the salt pork into pieces,
and distribute these well through the beans, placing a piece or two over
the top. The beans should then appear as shown in Fig. 5. Place the
cover on the dish and bake in a slow oven for 4 or 5 hours. Remove the
cover occasionally, stir the beans carefully so as not to crush nor
break them, and add enough water from time to time to keep the beans
well moistened. When done, the beans should be light brown in color, but
the top should be well browned. Sometimes it will be found necessary to
remove the cover in order to brown the beans sufficiently.

70. BEAN CROQUETTES.--Left-over baked beans need never be wasted, for
there are numerous uses to which they can be put. If it is not desired
to reheat them and serve them again as baked beans, they may be utilized
in soup, salads, and sandwiches, or they may be made into soufflé, as
explained in Art. 68, or into croquettes according to the accompanying
recipe. Bean croquettes may be served plain, but they are much improved
by the addition of tomato sauce.

BEAN CROQUETTES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. cold baked beans
1-1/2 c. bread crumbs
Milk to moisten crumbs
1 egg
1 tsp. salt
Pinch of pepper

To the beans add the bread crumbs slightly moistened with milk. Stir in
the egg, beaten, and the salt and pepper. Blend the entire mixture, form
into croquettes, and roll in dry crumbs. Bake in the oven until brown,
sauté in shallow fat, or fry in deep fat. Place on a platter, garnish
with parsley, and serve plain or with tomato sauce.

 BEETS AND THEIR PREPARATION

71. BEETS are a root vegetable that comes in two varieties, _red_ and
_white_. The red beets are more popular for cooking than the white ones,
and of these the ones that retain their dark-red color after cooking are
preferable to any other. The root, however, is not the only part of this
plant that is eaten, for the tops are also much used for food. When the
tops are to be cooked, the plants are usually not allowed to mature to
the extent that the root parts can be used; still, early in the summer,
when very small beets are to be had with the tops on, both the tops and
the beets may be used. At this age, the beets are very tender and do not
require long cooking. If the beets are not eaten when they are young,
they are allowed to mature in the ground and are then pulled in the fall
and stored for a winter vegetable.

Like other root vegetables, beets contain very little protein and fat,
but in their composition is included a fairly large percentage of
carbohydrate in the form of sugar. Their total food value is greater
than that of string beans, but is considerably less than that
of potatoes.

72. SELECTION AND CARE OF BEETS.--When beets are selected as a summer
vegetable with the idea of using both the tops and the roots, the tops
should be fresh, that is, not withered nor rotted. When the roots are to
be used, either as a summer or a winter vegetable, they should have a
smooth skin, should contain no blemishes, and, as nearly as possible,
should be uniform in size.

Summer beets require about the same care as any other vegetable; that
is, they should be kept in a cool, damp place until they are ready to be
cooked. If they are at all wilted at that time, they may be freshened by
allowing them to stand in a pan of cold water for several hours. Winter
beets, however, should be stored in a cool, dark place where they will
not freeze. A portion of the cellar that has a dirt floor is a very good
place to put the bins containing such vegetables. The woody tissue of
beets that are stored increases as the winter advances, so that any
beets that remain until spring are rather hard and extremely difficult
to cook. In fact, at times it is almost impossible to make them soft
enough to serve, but they can be greatly improved by soaking them in
cold water for a few hours before cooking them.  73. PREPARATION AND
COOKING OF BEETS.--In preparing young beets for cooking, allow an inch
or two of the stems to remain on the beets in order to prevent them from
bleeding. Of course, from winter beets, the entire stem should be
removed, as it will be dried up. Scrub beets of either variety carefully
with a vegetable brush until entirely free from dirt. Then, whether they
are old or young, put them to cook in boiling water without removing
their skins. Allow them to cook until they are soft enough to be pierced
with a fork. This is the best way in which to determine when the beets
are done, for as the length of time required to cook them depends
entirely on their age, no definite time can be stated. As soon as they
are sufficiently cooked, pour off the water, allow them to cool enough
to handle, and then remove the skins, which will slip off easily.

74. BUTTERED BEETS.--Butter added to beets increases both their
nutriment and their flavor. In order to prepare buttered beets, first
clean and cook them in the manner just explained. To remove the skins,
scrape the beets as thinly as possible, so as not to waste any more than
is necessary. Then slice them thin or cut them into 1/2-inch cubes,
season well with salt and pepper, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter for
each four persons to be served. Allow the beets to heat thoroughly in
the butter, and serve hot.

75. BEETS WITH CREAM DRESSING.--If a creamed vegetable is desired, beets
to which cream has been added will be very satisfactory. Clean and cook
the beets in the manner explained in Art. 73. Then peel, cut into
slices, place in a saucepan, and nearly cover with thin cream. Allow
them to cook in the cream for a few minutes, season with salt and
pepper, and serve.

76. BEETS WITH SOUR DRESSING.--To give variety, beets are sometimes
served with a sour dressing. Probably no other vegetable lends itself so
well to this sort of preparation as beets, with the result that a very
appetizing dish is provided.

BEETS WITH SOUR DRESSING
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 medium-sized beets
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/4 c. vinegar
1-1/4 c. hot water

Prepare and cook the beets as explained in Art. 73. When tender, drain
them, remove the skins, and dice the beets. Make a sauce by melting the
butter in a double boiler and adding the flour, salt, pepper, vinegar,
and hot water. Cook until the flour thickens the sauce and then pour
over the beets. Heat together and serve.

77. BAKED BEETS.--If something entirely different in the way of a
vegetable dish is wanted, baked beets will meet with favor. Beets may be
baked in a covered baking dish or on the open grate of an oven. A slow
fire produces the best results, and as a rule it will take 4 or 5 hours
to bake good-sized beets.

Wash thoroughly and dry the desired number of beets. Place them in a
baking dish and set in a slow oven or place them on the open grate. Bake
until they may be pierced with a fork. Remove from the skins and serve
with a sour sauce or merely with salt, pepper, and butter.

78. PICKLED BEETS.--When beets are cooked for any of the recipes that
have been given, it will be economy to boil more than will be needed for
one meal, for a large number can be cooked with practically the same
quantity of fuel as a few. Then the remainder may be pickled by peeling
them, cutting them into slices, and pouring over them hot vinegar
sweetened slightly and flavored with spice. Pickled beets make an
excellent relish and they will keep for an indefinite period.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS AND THEIR PREPARATION

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

79. BRUSSELS SPROUTS, as shown in Fig. 6, look just like tiny green
heads of cabbage. These heads grow along a stem that protrudes above the
surface of the ground in much the same way as does the stem to which a
head of cabbage is attached. The heads are cut from the stem and then
usually packed in quart boxes. It is in such boxes as these that they
are found in the markets, where they can be purchased from December
until early spring. They are considered a great delicacy because of the
fineness of their flavor, which rivals that of cauliflower and, while
closely resembling that of cabbage, is much superior to it. In food
value, they are somewhat higher than cauliflower, but about equal
to beets.

80. COOKING OF BRUSSELS SPROUTS.--To prepare Brussels sprouts for the
table, break off the outside leaves from the heads, and then in order to
remove any bugs that may be lodged in the heads, allow them to stand in
cold salted water for 1 hour or so before cooking. After removing the
sprouts from the salted water, pour enough boiling water over them to
cover them well, add 1 teaspoonful of salt to each quart of water, and
boil without any cover on the kettle until they can be easily pierced
with a fork. Care should be taken not to overcook the sprouts, for when
they are cooked too long they become red in color and develop a
strong flavor.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]

81. BUTTERED BRUSSELS SPROUTS.--When Brussels sprouts are properly
cooked and then seasoned with salt and pepper and flavored with butter,
an appetizing dish is the result. To make such a dish for about six
persons, prepare and cook 1 quart of Brussels sprouts in the manner just
explained. When they are tender, pour off the water, season with
additional salt and a dash of pepper, and add 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter. Allow the butter to melt over the sprouts and then serve hot.

If a more attractive dish is desired, the Brussels sprouts prepared in
this way may be combined with French lamb chops, as shown in Fig. 7.
Pile up the buttered sprouts in the center of a platter, and then place
broiled or sautéd lamb chops, whose ends are trimmed with paper frills,
around the sprouts in the manner shown.  82. CREAMED BRUSSELS
SPROUTS.--A very satisfactory way in which to prepare Brussels sprouts
is to serve a cream sauce over them. This sauce, of course, adds food
value, and at the same time greatly improves the flavor of the
vegetable.

CREAMED BRUSSELS SPROUTS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 qt. Brussels sprouts
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1-1/2 c. milk
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Prepare and cook the sprouts as explained in Art. 80. When they are
tender, drain the water from them. Make a white sauce of the butter,
flour, milk, salt, and pepper. Pour this over the sprouts, heat
together, and serve.

83. SCALLOPED BRUSSELS SPROUTS.--Undoubtedly the most palatable way of
preparing Brussels sprouts is to scallop them. The ingredients used in
the preparation of this dish add food value, as well as flavor.

SCALLOPED BRUSSELS SPROUTS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 qt. Brussels sprouts
3 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
2 c. milk
1 c. buttered crumbs

Prepare the sprouts as explained in Art. 80. Cook them in boiling salted
water until they are tender, and then drain. Make a white sauce of 2
tablespoonfuls of the butter, flour, salt, and milk. Butter the crumbs
by pouring 1 tablespoonful of melted butter over them, stirring until
well blended. Place one-fourth of the crumbs in the bottom of a baking
dish, add about half of the sprouts, and place another fourth of the
crumbs over the sprouts. Add the remaining half of the sprouts and pour
the sauce over these. Sprinkle the rest of the crumbs over the top,
place in the oven, and bake until the crumbs are brown and the
ingredients thoroughly heated.


CABBAGE AND ITS PREPARATION

84. CABBAGE consists of the foliage of the cabbage plant. It is a
succulent vegetable with a high flavor; in fact, its flavor is so strong
that in many cases it disagrees with persons. However, if cabbage is
properly cooked, no apprehension need be felt about eating it, for it
can be digested by most persons.  The food value of cabbage is not
high, being even less than that of string beans. The greater part of
this food value is carbohydrate in the form of sugar, but in order to
prepare cabbage so that it has any importance in the meal, considerable
quantities of protein, fat, and carbohydrate must be added. In itself,
it is valuable for its mineral salts and bulk.

Numerous varieties of cabbage can be procured, but only three are
commonly used. These include _white cabbage_, which is used the most;
_purple cabbage_, which is very dark in color and contains varying
shades of red and blue; and _Savoy cabbage_, which has a large number of
green crinkled leaves and is commonly cooked by boiling.

85. SELECTION AND CARE OF CABBAGE.--Heads of cabbage that feel firm and
solid to the touch and are rather heavy for their size are the best to
select for cooking purposes. This vegetable comes into the market early
in the summer and may be had until late in the fall. As it has excellent
keeping qualities, it may be stored for use as a winter vegetable. When
this is done, the stem and the roots should be allowed to remain on the
head, for then the cabbage is less apt to wither. If this precaution is
taken and the cabbage is stored in a cool place, no great care is
required to keep it in good condition until it is to be cooked unless,
of course, it is kept for an abnormal length of time.

86. PREPARATION AND COOKING OF CABBAGE.--To prepare cabbage for cooking,
remove the outside leaves and then cut the head that remains into pieces
of any desirable size. Whether the cabbage should be left in large
pieces or cut very fine depends on the dish that is to be prepared. For
the first cutting, be sure to cut the head down through the heart and
the stem, so that the part not used will remain intact. This may then be
used another time if it is kept cool and moist. In case the cabbage
becomes at all wilted, it may be freshened by placing it in cold water a
short time before it is to be cooked.

87. Cabbage is a vegetable that has many uses and is eaten both raw and
cooked. Numerous opinions exist about the difference in digestibility
between raw and cooked cabbage, as well as the best ways in which to
cook this vegetable. It may be true that in some cases raw cabbage does
not cause the disagreeable effect that cooked cabbage often does, but
the reason for this is that cabbage when raw has a milder flavor than
when cooked, cabbage generally developing during the cooking a strong
flavor that causes trouble. The flavor of cabbage, however, may be
dissipated if attention is given to the cooking, so that, when properly
prepared, cabbage can be eaten with little fear of indigestion.

88. When cabbage is cooked, it is usually boiled like other vegetables;
that is, it is covered well with boiling water to which 1 teaspoonful of
salt is added for each quart, and then allowed to boil until it can be
easily pierced with a fork. Its cooking differs, however, from that of
many vegetables, string beans, for instance, in that it is carried on
with the cover removed from the kettle. This plan permits of the
evaporation of much of the strong flavor, which arises in the steam and
which would otherwise be reabsorbed by the cabbage. Since it is the
retention of this flavor, together with long cooking, that causes this
vegetable to disagree with persons who eat it, both of these points
should be carefully watched. If it is cooked in an open vessel and it is
boiled just long enough to be tender, so that when done it is white and
fresh-looking and not in any way discolored, an easily digested dish
will be the result. Usually cabbage will cook sufficiently in 1/2 hour
and often in less time.

89. BOILED CABBAGE.--Although cabbage permits of numerous methods of
preparation, plain boiled cabbage finds favor with many persons.
Generally, cabbage prepared in this way is merely seasoned with butter
and served in a part of the liquid in which it is cooked, but it has a
more appetizing flavor if bacon or ham fat is used for seasoning or if a
small quantity of ham or salt pork is cooked with it.

To prepare boiled cabbage, remove the outside leaves from a head of
cabbage, cut it in half down through the heart, and then cut each half
into coarse pieces. Unless it is very fresh, allow it to stand in cold
water for at least 1 hour before cooking. Put it into a kettle or a
saucepan, cover well with boiling water, and add 1 teaspoonful of salt
for each quart of water. If ham or salt pork is to be cooked with the
cabbage, put a small piece in the kettle with the cabbage. Allow the
cabbage to cook with the cover removed until it is sufficiently tender
to be pierced with a fork. Pour off all or a part of the liquid,
depending on whether it is to be served dry or in its own liquid, and
then, in case it has been cooked alone, add butter or ham or bacon fat
for flavor. If not sufficiently seasoned, add pepper and more salt.

90. CREAMED CABBAGE.--When cabbage is to be creamed, it is cut up into
fairly fine pieces with a sharp knife. The cream sauce that is added to
it provides considerable food value and greatly improves its flavor.

CREAMED CABBAGE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 c. finely cut cabbage
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1/2 c. milk or thin cream
1/2 c. liquid from cabbage

Cook the cabbage according to the directions given in Art. 89 until it
is tender and then drain the water from it. While it is cooking, melt
the butter in a double boiler, add the flour, and stir until smooth.
Pour in the heated liquid and season with the salt and pepper. Stir
until the flour is thickened and the sauce is smooth. Pour this over the
cabbage, heat together for a few minutes, and serve hot.

91. SCALLOPED CABBAGE.--Scalloped cabbage is a particularly appetizing
vegetable dish, and, on account of the ingredients used in its
preparation, it is more nutritious than some of the other dishes in
which cabbage is used.

SCALLOPED CABBAGE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 c. cabbage
1 c. buttered crumbs
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 c. milk
1/2 c. liquid from cabbage

Cut the cabbage into very small pieces with a sharp knife or a cabbage
chopper. Cook according to the directions given in Art. 89 until nearly
tender, and then drain. Spread 1/4 cupful of the buttered crumbs in the
bottom of a baking dish, put one-half of the cabbage over this, and then
add another 1/4 cupful of the crumbs and the remaining cabbage. Over
this pour a white sauce made from the butter, flour, salt, pepper, milk,
and liquid from the cabbage. Sprinkle the rest of the crumbs over the
top. Bake in a slow oven until the cabbage is thoroughly heated through
and the crumbs are browned on top. This baking will complete the cooking
of the cabbage. Serve hot.  92. HOT SLAW.--If a slightly sour flavor is
desired in a vegetable dish, hot slaw will undoubtedly appeal to
the taste.

HOT SLAW
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 c. cabbage
1 c. water
2 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/3 c. vinegar
1 egg

Slice the cabbage very fine with a sharp knife or a cabbage cutter. Put
it in a saucepan, add the water, and allow it to cook until the water is
about half evaporated. Melt the butter in a pan and to it add the flour,
salt, and vinegar. Then stir the beaten egg in quickly and pour this
sauce over the cabbage at once. Allow the mixture to cook until the
sauce has thickened, stirring constantly to prevent the curding of the
egg. Serve hot.

93. MAKING SAUERKRAUT.--As is well known, sauerkraut is a cabbage
preparation that is made by salting finely cut cabbage, packing it
tightly, and allowing it to ferment under pressure. This food is made
and sold commercially, so that the housewife can usually purchase it in
any quantity she desires. However, as it is not at all difficult to make
sauerkraut, and as a supply of cabbage in this form provides a valuable
article of food during the winter months in households where it is
relished, the housewife will do well to prepare enough of this kind of
cabbage to vary her meals during the winter. That she may understand how
to proceed with the making of sauerkraut and the proper cooking of it,
the accompanying directions and recipes are given.

94. For every 10 medium-sized heads of cabbage, measure 2 cupfuls of
salt. Cut the heads of cabbage into quarters and shred on a cabbage
slicer, or cutter. Place several inches of the shredded cabbage in the
bottom of a large crock, and over it sprinkle a layer of salt. Stamp
this down with a wooden potato masher or some other similar utensil.
Then add another layer of cabbage and salt and stamp this down in the
same way. Proceed in this manner until the crock is nearly full. Then
place a clean cloth over the cabbage in the crock. On this cloth place a
clean board as near the size of the crock as possible, and on the board
place a large clean stone or some other weight. When thus filled and
weighted down, place the crock in a cool place. The cabbage will then
begin to ferment, and it is this fermentation that changes the cabbage
into sauerkraut. After a time, juice will form and gradually rise over
the top of the board, and on top of this juice will form a scum. Remove
this scum at once, and do not allow any to collect at any time after the
fermentation of the cabbage ceases. Occasionally, when a supply of
sauerkraut is taken from the crock for cooking, replace the cloth by a
clean one, but always be sure to put the board and the weight back
in place.

95. SAUERKRAUT WITH SPARERIBS.--Persons who are fond of sauerkraut find
the combination of sauerkraut and spareribs very appetizing. The
spareribs give the cabbage a very pleasing flavor and at the same time
supply nourishment to the dish.

SAUERKRAUT WITH SPARERIBS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 qt. sauerkraut
2 lb. spareribs
1 tsp. salt
3 c. water

Put the sauerkraut and the spareribs into a kettle and add the salt and
water. Allow to simmer slowly for 2 or more hours. If additional water
is necessary, add it from time to time. Just before removing from the
heat, allow the water to boil down so that what remains may be served
with the hot sauerkraut.

96. BAKED SAUERKRAUT.--In the cooking of sauerkraut for the table, pork
in one form or another is generally added; in fact, one rarely thinks of
sauerkraut except in combination with pork. While boiling is the method
that is usually applied to this vegetable, many housewives prefer to
bake it, for then the odor does not escape so easily and a flavor that
most persons prefer is developed.

BAKED SAUERKRAUT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 lb. fresh pork
1 qt. sauerkraut
1 Tb. salt
3 c. water

Cut the pork into several large chunks, and put it with the sauerkraut
into a baking dish that has a cover. Add the salt and water, cover the
dish and place in the oven. Bake slowly for 2 or 3 hours. Serve hot.

97. SAUTÉD SAUERKRAUT.--If an entirely different way of cooking
sauerkraut is desired, it may be sautéd. When nicely browned and served
with boiled frankfurters, it is very appetizing.

SAUTÉD SAUERKRAUT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 qt. sauerkraut
4 Tb. bacon or ham fat
2 tsp. salt

Steam the sauerkraut over boiling water for about 1 hour. Then melt the
fat in an iron frying pan, add the sauerkraut and sprinkle with the
salt. Place a cover over the pan and allow the sauerkraut to sauté until
it is slightly browned on the bottom. Stir and continue to cook until
the entire amount is slightly browned. Serve hot.


CARROTS AND THEIR PREPARATION

98. CARROTS are one of the root vegetables. They are similar in
composition to beets, having practically the same total food value,
which is for the most part carbohydrate in the form of sugar. Besides
being valuable in the diet for their mineral salts and bulk, they add
variety to the menu, especially in the winter, for upon maturing they
can be kept for a long time if they are properly stored. As tiny young
carrots, they are also much used as a summer vegetable, and when cooked
whole and served in an attractive way they make a delicious
vegetable dish.

99. SELECTION AND PREPARATION.--The selection of carrots is a simple
matter, because they keep well and are not likely to be found in a
spoiled condition in the market. When small summer carrots are
purchased, they should be fresh and should have their tops on. Winter
carrots should be as nearly uniform in size as possible and should not
be extremely large. Those which are too large in circumference are
likely to have a hollow in the center and are not nearly so desirable as
thin, solid ones. Carrots of any kind should be uniform in color, and
should be without the green portion that is sometimes found on the top
near the stem and that is caused by exposure to the light in growing.

100. In preparing carrots for cooking, they should be scraped rather
than peeled, in order to avoid wasting any of the vegetable. They are
always cooked in boiling salted water, after which they can be treated
in various ways. The water in which carrots are cooked should not be
thrown away, as it may be used to flavor soup stock. If any carrots
remain after a meal, they may be utilized in vegetable salad or soup.

101. BUTTERED CARROTS.--If small, tender carrots can be obtained, they
will be found to be delicious upon being boiled and then dressed with
butter. Winter carrots may be prepared in this way too, but they will
probably require a little more cooking to make them tender.

BUTTERED CARROTS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c. diced carrots
2 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Wash and scrape the carrots and cut into half-inch pieces. Put to cook
in enough boiling water to cover the carrots well, and add 1 teaspoonful
of salt for each quart of water. Cook in a covered kettle until they can
be easily pierced with a fork and then drain off the water. Add the
butter, salt, and pepper, heat until the butter melts, and serve.

102. CARROTS WITH PARSLEY.--The addition of parsley to carrots gives a
flavor that improves them very much. This should be chopped fine and
added after the carrots have cooked sufficiently.

CARROTS WITH PARSLEY
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c. sliced carrots
3 Tb. parsley finely chopped
2 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Wash and scrape the carrots, slice in very thin slices, and cook until
tender in boiling salted water. Drain and add the chopped parsley,
butter, salt, and pepper. Mix carefully so as not to break the slices of
carrot. Serve hot.

103. BROWNED CARROTS.--A very appetizing way in which to prepare carrots
is to cut them in slices lengthwise, boil them until tender, and then
brown them in fat. Wash and scrape the desired number of carrots, cut
into slices lengthwise, and if large-sized carrots are used, cut the
slices into halves. Cook in boiling salted water until tender and then
drain. Melt some fat in a frying pan, place the carrots in the hot fat,
and brown first on one side and then on the other, turning the slices
carefully so as not to break them. A few minutes before removing the
carrots from the frying pan, sprinkle sugar over them and allow the
sugar to melt. In removing them to a vegetable dish, pour over them the
sirup that forms. Serve hot.

 CAULIFLOWER AND ITS PREPARATION

104. CAULIFLOWER grows in heads as does cabbage, but only the flower or
blossom of the plant is eaten. A head of cauliflower from which the
leaves have not been removed is shown in Fig. 8. In flavor and
composition this vegetable is similar to cabbage, but its flavor is a
little more delicate. Still, cauliflower should always be cooked in an
uncovered vessel, as are cabbage and Brussels sprouts, if a strong
disagreeable flavor would be avoided.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

105. SELECTION AND COOKING.--Very solid heads of cauliflower that are
creamy white in color and free from the black specks or blemishes so
common to this vegetable should be selected for cooking. The only care
that cauliflower requires before cooking is to keep it in a cool place,
for it does not wilt nor decay quickly.

To prepare this vegetable for cooking, the white head should be cut from
the leaves, which are discarded. Then the head should be placed upside
down in a pan of salt water and allowed to soak for an hour in order to
drive out the small bugs or worms that are so frequently found in this
vegetable. The cauliflower may then be cooked whole or broken apart, but
in either case it should be cooked until tender in boiling salted water
with the cover removed from the kettle.

106. CAULIFLOWER WITH TOMATO SAUCE.--Variety can be secured in the
preparation of cauliflower by serving it with a tomato sauce. Besides
being very palatable, this is an extremely attractive dish because of
the contrast in colors. Chicken gravy may be used instead of tomato
sauce, and a most delightful dish is the result.

CAULIFLOWER WITH TOMATO SAUCE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 head cauliflower
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
2 c. strained tomato

Soak the cauliflower in cold salted water, and then tie it carefully in
a piece of cheesecloth and put it to cook in boiling salted water. Cook
until tender, but not so long that it will fall to pieces. Take from the
water, remove the cheesecloth carefully, and place the cauliflower in a
vegetable dish. While the cauliflower is cooking, prepare the sauce by
melting the butter in a double boiler, adding the flour, salt, and
pepper, and stirring into this the heated strained tomato made by
forcing canned or stewed tomatoes through a sieve. Cook until the sauce
has thickened and then pour over the cauliflower in the vegetable dish.
Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 9]

107. SCALLOPED CAULIFLOWER.--Another opportunity to make a delicious
scalloped dish is afforded by cauliflower. In fact, many persons prefer
scalloped cauliflower to any of the dishes made from this vegetable. The
ingredients used with the cauliflower increase its food value, which is
somewhat low.

SCALLOPED CAULIFLOWER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 head cauliflower
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 c. milk
1 c. water from cauliflower
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. buttered crumbs

Prepare and cook the cauliflower according to the directions given in
Art. 105, breaking it into flowerets before pouring the boiling water on
it. When it has cooked tender, drain the water from it. Prepare a sauce
with the butter, flour, milk, water from the cauliflower, salt, and
pepper. Butter the crumbs by pouring 1 tablespoonful of melted butter
over them. Put 1/4 cupful of the crumbs on the bottom of a baking dish,
add one-half of the cauliflower, and over this place another 1/4 cupful
of crumbs. Then add the remainder of the cauliflower, and pour the white
sauce over all. Sprinkle the remainder of the crumbs over the top. Place
in a hot oven and bake until well heated through and brown on top. Serve
from the dish.

108. CREAMED CAULIFLOWER.--A very attractive vegetable dish can be
prepared from cauliflower by cooking the head whole and then serving a
cream sauce over it, as shown in Fig. 9. In serving, a portion of the
head should be broken off for each person and served with a little of
the cream sauce.

CREAMED CAULIFLOWER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 head cauliflower
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 c. milk
1/2 c. water in which cauliflower was cooked
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Soak a solid head of cauliflower in cold salted water for about 1 hour.
Then wash thoroughly, wrap carefully in cheesecloth, and cook in boiling
salted water until tender. When sufficiently cooked, drain, and make a
sauce of the other ingredients. Place the cauliflower in a vegetable
dish, pour the white sauce over it, and serve hot.


CELERY AND ITS PREPARATION

109. CELERY is the stem of a plant that grows in stalks, as shown in
Fig. 10. When the stalks are large, they are sold singly, but if they
are very small, several of them are tied together and sold in a bunch.
The season for celery begins in the fall and lasts until early spring.
It may be obtained in the summer, but as the price is usually high and
the quality not good, very little use should be made of it during
that time.

The chief use of celery is as a relish, when it is eaten raw, but it is
also valuable for flavoring soups and making salads, pickles, and
various other dishes. It is probably used less frequently as a cooked
vegetable than in any other way, but when it is in season and can be
purchased at a reasonable price, it should be cooked to give variety
to the diet.

The food value of celery is extremely low, being less than 100 calories
to the pound or about equal to that of 1 ounce of meat. However, in
spite of this fact, celery is valuable for its mineral salts and bulk,
as well as for the appetizing quality that it lends to various foods and
to the meals at which it is served.

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

110. CARE AND PREPARATION.--Well-bleached, firm stalks of celery should
be selected for use. After it comes into the house, it may be kept in
good condition for a long time if it is wrapped in a damp cloth and put
where it will keep cool. A good plan is to serve the hearts and tender
inside stems raw, as explained in _Soup_, and then to use the coarse
outside stems for cooking, flavoring soups, or making salads. Celery
must be cleaned carefully for dirt often clings to the ridges. After
being scrubbed thoroughly, it will become crisp and tender if it is
allowed to stand in cold water for some time before serving. When it is
to be served as a cooked vegetable, it should be cooked in boiling
salted water, as are other vegetables, and then seasoned or dressed in
any desirable way. The water in which it is cooked should be utilized in
the making of sauce or soup.

111. CREAMED CELERY.--The usual way of preparing celery when it is to be
served as a cooked vegetable is to cream it. The cream sauce that is
added to the celery increases its food value considerably and greatly
improves its flavor. This sauce may be made entirely of milk or of half
milk and half liquid from the celery.

CREAMED CELERY
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c. diced celery
3 Tb. butter
3 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. milk
1/2 c. water in which celery was cooked

Cook the celery in boiling salted water until tender, and then drain.
When the celery has cooked, make a white sauce of the other ingredients.
Pour this sauce over the cooked celery, heat together, and serve.

112. CELERY AU GRATIN.--The food value of celery may be still further
increased by combining it with cheese and bread crumbs in addition to a
cream sauce. Such a dish, which is known as _celery au gratin_, is
prepared according to the accompanying recipe.

CELERY AU GRATIN
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 c. diced celery
2-1/2 Tb. butter
2-1/2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. milk
1 c. water in which celery was cooked
1 c. buttered crumbs
1/2 c. grated cheese

Cook the celery in boiling salted water until tender and then drain.
Prepare the cream sauce in the usual manner. Butter the crumbs by
stirring them into 1 tablespoonful of melted butter. Put 1/4 cupful of
the crumbs in the bottom of a baking dish and put one-half of the celery
over them. Place another 1/4 cupful of the crumbs over the celery, and
on top of this sprinkle 1/4 cupful of the grated cheese. Add the
remainder of the celery and pour the sauce over this. Finally, add the
other 1/4 cupful of cheese and the remainder of the crumbs. Place in a
hot oven, and bake until well heated through and the crumbs are browned.
Serve hot.


CORN AND ITS PREPARATION

113. The seeds of the maize plant, or Indian corn, especially the
variety known as _sweet corn_, are eaten as a vegetable when they are
immature. They grow on a woody cob, and when they are green they are
soft and milky; but when they become ripe they are hard and are then
ground as grain. Many varieties of sweet corn are used, but some are
better in quality than others. In some varieties, the kernels, or seeds,
are yellow, while in others they are white; also, some of them are
suitable for use early in the summer, while others come later in the
season. However, in spite of this difference in quality, color, and
season, all kinds of corn used as a vegetable are called _green corn_
and may be prepared in exactly the same ways.

114. The food value of corn, which is very high, even exceeding that of
Irish potatoes, is due principally to the carbohydrate it contains. This
food substance is in the form of sugar in the green kernels, but as they
mature it changes to starch. The food value of the dry grain is
therefore higher, and the carbohydrate is in a different form.

When the contents of the kernels is still in the liquid form, the corn
is said to be at the _milk stage_, and is generally considered to be too
young for table use. On the other hand, when the liquid in the kernels
has become thickened, the corn, which is then at the _dough stage_, is
thought to be too old for use as a vegetable. To be ideal for culinary
purposes, it should be just between the milk and dough stages. Then, if
it is in good condition, a most satisfactory vegetable is the result.

115. The ear on which the corn kernels grow is entirely encased in
several layers of husks. These are not removed until just before the
corn is to be cooked; so when this vegetable is in the market the husks
are allowed to remain on the ears. The condition of the ears can be
determined by stripping the husks down a little and examining the
kernels. If they are well filled, they may be considered to be in proper
condition; otherwise, they will not be suitable for cooking. No special
care need be given to green corn, provided it is not husked. However,
when it has been husked, it should be cooked at once. In the husking of
corn, all corn silk that is found inside of the husks should be
carefully removed, for this is very annoying in the cooked vegetable and
its presence indicates carelessness.

116. CORN ON THE COB.--The simplest way in which to prepare green corn
is to cook it on the cob. When corn first comes into the market, it is
usually very tender and makes a most satisfactory dish when prepared
in this way.

To cook corn on the cob, husk the corn, remove the silk from the ears,
and place them in a kettle. Pour enough boiling water over them to cover
them well, and add 1 teaspoonful of salt for each quart of water. Boil 5
minutes, remove from the water, and serve at once. In eating corn on the
cob, most persons dress it with butter, pepper, and salt.

[Illustration: FIG. 11]

117. CORN COOKED IN MILK.--Often it is not desired to eat corn on the
cob. When this is the case, it may be cut off the ear and cooked in
various ways. A simple way to prepare it is to cook it with milk and
season it with salt, pepper, and butter, as explained in the
accompanying recipe.

Select the desired number of ears of green corn, husk them, and remove
the silk. Then, as shown in Fig. 11, cut the corn from the cob with a
sharp knife, grasping the ear by the larger end and cutting upwards.
After cutting off the kernels, scrape the ears so that nothing edible
will be wasted, drawing the knife downwards. Put the corn into a
saucepan, add milk until the corn is nearly covered, and season with
salt, pepper, and a little butter. Allow the corn to simmer for about 10
minutes, stirring frequently to prevent the milk from sticking to the
bottom of the pan and scorching. No difficulty will be experienced in
the preparation of this dish if a double boiler is used, but longer
cooking will be required. When the corn is sufficiently cooked, remove
from the fire and serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 12]  118. CORN PULP.--Some persons are unable to
digest the coarse hulls of green corn, but can eat the corn if the hulls
are removed. Such persons need not be deprived of the delights of this
vegetable, for it may be prepared in the form of pulp, which will not
disagree with them.

To prepare corn pulp, first cut a slit down each row of kernels with a
sharp knife as shown in Fig. 12; then, in the manner shown in Fig. 13,
scrape out the contents of the kernels with the dull edge of the knife,
drawing the knife downwards. When all the pulp has been removed, season
it with salt, pepper, and butter, and heat it thoroughly in a double
boiler. Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

If it is not desirable to serve the corn pulp in this manner, it may be
used in various ways, as the following recipes indicate. A good
substitute for corn pulp is canned corn, but this must be chopped in
order to break up the hulls.

119. CORN SOUFFLÉ.--No more delightful corn dish can be prepared than
corn soufflé, for in addition to its being appetizing and nutritious, it
is extremely dainty. It may be cooked in a baking dish, but it is more
attractive when baked in individual baking dishes. A point to remember
about its preparation is that it should be served immediately upon being
taken from the oven, for soufflé always shrinks as it cools.

CORN SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. green corn pulp
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
2 Tb. melted butter
2 Tb. flour
1/4 c. milk
2 eggs

Mix the corn pulp, salt, pepper, and melted butter, stir in the flour,
and add the milk. Separate the eggs, beat the yolks, and add them to the
mixture. Then beat the whites stiff and fold them in. Pour into a
buttered baking dish or into individual baking dishes, set in a pan of
hot water, and bake until brown. Serve at once.

120. CORN OYSTERS.--Variety can be secured in the use of corn by making
corn oysters. These get their name from the fact that they resemble
oysters in both size and shape. They may be served as a garnish for a
meat dish or as a vegetable dish.

CORN OYSTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. corn pulp
1 egg
1/4 c. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1/2 tsp. baking powder

Prepare the corn pulp according to the directions given in Art. 118. To
this add the beaten egg, flour, salt, pepper, and baking powder. Drop in
tablespoonfuls on a well-greased griddle. When brown on one side, turn
and brown on the other side. Then fold through the center, doubling one
side over the other. Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

121. CORN FRITTERS.--The popularity of corn fritters, which have corn
pulp as their foundation, is undoubtedly due both to their flavor and to
the variety they afford in the diet. After being fried, corn fritters
should appear as shown in Fig. 14. They may be served plain, but most
persons prefer them with a sauce of some kind or with maple sirup.

CORN FRITTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. corn pulp, or 1 can corn, chopped
1 c. flour
1 tsp. baking powder
1 tsp. salt
2 eggs

If canned corn is used, drain off the liquid before using it. To the
corn, add the flour, baking powder, and salt. Separate the eggs and stir
in the beaten yolks. Beat the whites stiff and fold them into the
mixture. Drop with a spoon into deep fat, fry until brown, remove from
the fat, and drain on paper. Serve plain, with a desired sauce, or with
maple sirup.


CUCUMBERS AND THEIR PREPARATION

122. The hard-rinded fruit of the cucumber plant has been used from time
immemorial as a vegetable. In food value, cucumbers are very low,
comparing closely with celery in this respect; however, as they contain
a large amount of cellulose, or bulk, and mineral salts, they should not
be disregarded in the diet. They have a rather strong flavor due to
their volatile oils, which so frequently disagree with persons and which
give cucumbers a reputation for being difficult to digest. However, when
they are properly prepared, they can be eaten by most persons
without harm.

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

123. Formerly it was the custom to soak slices of cucumber in salt water
before serving them. This procedure, however, has been found to be poor
policy, for nothing is gained by it and the salt toughens the cellulose
and makes the cucumbers limp and rubbery in texture. A much more
satisfactory way to prepare cucumbers is to slice them and then soak
them for some time before serving in ice water or water as cold as can
be obtained. They will then become crisp and delicious, and, besides
being more appetizing and agreeable, they will be no less digestible.
After being sliced and chilled, cucumbers are often combined with sliced
onions and eaten with vinegar, salt, and pepper, or they are eaten alone
or on lettuce, dressed with mayonnaise dressing.

124. STUFFED CUCUMBERS.--Possibly the only recipe for cooked cucumbers
that is used to any extent is the accompanying one for stuffed
cucumbers. Cucumbers prepared in this way are very palatable, and
because of the ingredients used are much higher in food value than when
eaten alone. Such a dish is attractive, too, as Fig. 15 shows.

STUFFED CUCUMBERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 cucumbers
2 Tb. butter
1 small onion, chopped
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1-1/2 c. steamed rice
1 c. stewed tomatoes
Bread crumbs

Select medium-sized cucumbers, wash and peel them, and cut them in half
lengthwise. Hollow out the center so that the cucumbers will have the
shape of boats. Then melt the butter in a frying pan, add the chopped
onion, salt, and pepper, and heat together for a few minutes. Next add
the rice, tomatoes, and sufficient bread crumbs to take up any excess of
moisture. Fill the cucumbers with this mixture and bake until they are
soft enough to be easily pierced with a fork. During the first part of
the cooking, pour a small amount of hot water into the pan in which the
cucumbers are baked. Serve hot.


EGGPLANT AND ITS PREPARATION

125. EGGPLANT belongs to the class of fruit vegetables, and is closely
related to the tomato in structure and composition. It grows rather
large in size, is covered with a smooth brownish-purple skin, and is
made up of material that is close and firm in texture and creamy white
in color. Because of the nature of its structure, eggplant would seem to
be high in food value, but, on the contrary, this vegetable has very
little. In this respect, it is about equal to cabbage and cauliflower
and slightly less than string beans.

126. Eggplant is found in the market from early summer until the
beginning of winter. Because it is protected by a heavy skin, it keeps
well and needs no special care in storage. The strong flavor of the
pulp is disagreeable to many persons. However, it has been found that
much of this flavor may be removed by soaking the eggplant in strong
salt water or by sprinkling it with salt after it has been sliced and
then allowing it to stand for some time. It may be prepared in a variety
of ways; so, if the members of the family care for it, the housewife
will find it of great assistance in planning and preparing meals.

127. SAUTÉD EGGPLANT.--The usual way of preparing eggplant is to cut it
into slices and then sauté it. As the slices are dipped into beaten egg
and then into crumbs before sautéing, the food value of this vegetable
is increased and its flavor improved.

Peel the eggplant and then cut it into 1/4-inch slices. Sprinkle salt
over the slices and let them stand for 1 hour or more; then pour off the
juice that has collected. Beat an egg slightly, and to it add a few
tablespoonfuls of milk or water. Dip the slices of eggplant first into
the beaten egg and then into crumbs. When sufficiently coated, sauté in
shallow fat, browning first on one side and then on the other.
Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

128. BAKED EGGPLANT.--An attractive dish can be made by removing the
contents from an eggplant, filling the cavity with a well-seasoned
stuffing, and then baking the stuffed eggplant. When an eggplant is
prepared in this way, it will appear as in Fig. 16.

BAKED EGGPLANT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 medium-sized eggplant
2 c. dried bread crumbs
1/2 c. milk
2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 small onion, chopped
1 Tb. parsley
2 Tb. butter

Wash the eggplant and cook in boiling water for about 10 minutes. Remove
from the water, cut off the top, scoop out the contents, and chop it
into small pieces. With this finely chopped pulp, mix the bread crumbs,
milk, salt, pepper, onion, parsley, and melted butter. When the whole is
thoroughly blended, pack it into the shell of the eggplant and place in
the oven. Bake for about 30 minutes or until the stuffing is thoroughly
cooked and the top is brown. Serve hot.

129. SCALLOPED EGGPLANT.--If it is desired to increase the food value of
eggplant and improve its flavor too, this vegetable should be scalloped.
The accompanying recipe carefully followed will produce a most
appetizing dish.

SCALLOPED EGGPLANT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 medium-sized eggplant
1 c. dried crumbs
2 Tb. butter
2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1-1/2 c. milk

Peel the eggplant and cut it into 1/2-inch pieces. Put into a saucepan,
cover with boiling salted water, cook until tender, and then drain.
Grease a baking dish, spread 1/4 cupful of crumbs on the bottom, and add
one-half of the eggplant. Dot with butter and then sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Add another 1/4 cupful of crumbs and the remaining eggplant,
dot again with butter, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Pour the milk
over the whole and sprinkle the remaining 1/2 cupful of crumbs on the
top. Place in the oven and bake for 1/2 hour or more. Serve hot.


FRENCH ARTICHOKES AND THEIR PREPARATION

130. FRENCH ARTICHOKES, sometimes known as _globe artichokes, California
artichokes_, and _cardoons_, are related to the family of thistles. They
are grown for the sake of their large flower-heads, or buds, which are
shown in Fig. 17 and which are much used as a food. These plants stand
storage and shipment very well and may be kept for long periods of time
without spoiling. It is therefore possible to transport them
considerable distances, a very gratifying fact, since most persons
consider artichokes a great delicacy.

131. Not all of the artichoke plant is eaten. The portions of the flower
that develop in the center of the base are removed before the base is
eaten. After the artichokes are cooked, the scales, or leaves, are
pulled from the cooked head with the fingers and the lower part of each
one is dipped into sauce and eaten. The inner scales are much more
tender and edible than the coarse outside ones. Although artichokes
find favor with many and are considered somewhat of a delicacy, they are
low in food value, being about equal to asparagus in this respect. To
add food material, a dressing, such as drawn-butter sauce or mayonnaise
dressing, is usually served.

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

132. ARTICHOKES WITH HOLLANDAISE SAUCE.--The usual method of preparing
artichokes is to boil them and then serve them with melted butter or a
sauce. Hollandaise dressing is used with the artichokes shown in Fig.
18. Boiled artichokes may also be cooled and then served with a
salad dressing.

Secure the desired number of artichokes and prepare them for boiling by
pulling off the coarse outside leaves, cutting off the top of the bud,
and removing the stem close to the bud. Cover well with boiling water,
add 1 teaspoonful of salt to each quart, and boil until tender, or for
about 45 minutes. Remove from the water and serve hot with melted butter
or Hollandaise sauce. If it is desired to use them for a salad, allow
them to cool before adding the salad dressing.

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

 VEGETABLES (PART 1)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) To what is the flavor of vegetables largely due? (_b_) How
does cookery affect this?

(2) Describe the structure of vegetables.

(3) What food substances do vegetables as a class supply to the diet?

(4) (_a_) What are the legumes? (_b_) What food substance do they supply
in quantity to the diet?

(5) Name the classes of vegetables and give examples of each class.

(6) (_a_) When is soaking vegetables in salt water necessary? (_b_) What
proportions of salt and water are used?

(7) What effect has the application of heat on vegetables?

(8) Give an example of a method of cooking vegetables that: (_a_) wastes
food material; (_b_) conserves food material.

(9) Give the reason for the use of soda in cooking vegetables.

(10) How should salt be used in the cooking of: (_a_) tender vegetables?
(_b_) tough vegetables?

(11) Why should care be taken not to overcook cabbage, cauliflower, and
Brussels sprouts?

(12) What is a good general rule to follow for the length of time
necessary for cooking vegetables?

(13) Of what value are the sauces used to dress vegetables?

(14) Mention some methods of preparing vegetables that greatly increase
their food value.

(15) What value has the addition of salt pork or bacon in the
preparation of dried beans?

(16) (_a_) Why should the cover be left off the kettle during the
cooking of cabbage? (_b_) What other vegetables are cooked in this way?

(17) Explain why old carrots and beets require longer cooking than young
ones.

(18) (_a_) At what stage is green corn best for table use? (_b_) How may
this be recognized?

(19) What value have corn pulp and bean purée?

(20) (_a_) How should cucumbers be prepared before serving raw? (_b_)
How may the strong flavor of eggplant be improved?

       *       *       *       *       *



VEGETABLES (PART 2)
       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARATION OF VEGETABLES AS FOOD (Continued)

GREENS AND THEIR PREPARATION

VARIETIES AND FOOD VALUE

1. Varieties of Greens.--The leaves and stems of many young plants in
either their wild or their cultivated form are used for food. All of
them are similar in composition, but many of them differ in flavor and
appearance. The cultivated ones include beet tops, endive, spinach, and
kale, as well as lettuce, collards, Swiss chard, sorrel, mustard greens,
turnip tops, parsley, and cultivated cress and dandelion. The four
greens mentioned first are illustrated in Fig. 1, beet tops being shown
in the lower right corner; endive, in the upper right corner; spinach,
in the lower left corner; and kale, in the upper left corner. Commonest
among the wild greens are dandelion, cress, wild mustard, dock, pokeweed
sprouts, milkweed sprouts, and lamb's-quarters. Most of these wild
varieties are excellent in the spring when they are young and tender,
but it is not advisable to use them for food unless one is perfectly
familiar with their appearance.

2. Food Value of Greens.--The food value of all greens with the
exception of dandelion is very low, being just about equal to that of
celery and cucumbers. This may be increased in their preparation by the
addition of other food materials. However, the chief use of greens in
the diet is not to supply food value, but mineral salts, the most
important one being iron in a form that is necessary for building up
the blood.

 GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR COOKING GREENS

3. The cooking of greens, both wild and cultivated, is not only simple
but practically the same for all varieties. When they are not used as a
salad vegetable, they are merely boiled until tender and then dressed in
any desired way. Some kinds admit of special preparation, and wherever
this is the case specific directions are given under the particular
variety, but even in such an event the preliminary preparation is
the same.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

To prepare greens, look them over carefully, remove any decayed or
withered parts, cut off the leaves, and wash in fresh cold water. Remove
from the water and wash again, and do this as many times as seems
necessary to remove all the sand and grit that the stalks contain. An
important point to remember is that the greens should not be cleansed by
pouring the water off, as the sand will then remain in the pan and is
likely to mix with the greens again. When they are thoroughly washed,
put them on to cook in a saucepan or a similar utensil. If they are
young and tender, they should be cooked as much as possible in their own
juice in order to retain all the valuable mineral salts they contain,
only enough water being added to start the cooking without burning. In
the case of greens that are very strong in flavor, it will be necessary
to cook them in a larger quantity of water and then pour off what
remains after cooking. When they have cooked until they are tender,
season them if necessary, and add butter to give them flavor and
increase their food value. Vinegar or a slice of lemon adds much to the
flavor of greens.

 BEET TOPS

4. The tops of beets include the leaves and the stems of this vegetable,
as Fig. 1 shows. They are at their best when the beets are very young or
before the beets themselves have developed. Beet tops are not used so
extensively as some greens, but they will be found to have a more
agreeable flavor than many greens that are more popular. Beets are
raised for the purpose of supplying greens by planting the seeds closely
enough together to form a thick bed of leaves and then thinning them out
before the beets have developed. A few may be allowed to remain and
develop for use as beets. Young beets that are purchased with the tops
on also furnish a source of beet tops as well as beets.

When beet tops are to be cooked, cut the stems into inch lengths and use
them with the leaves. Proceed to clean and cook the greens according to
the directions given in Art. 3. Season with salt and pepper and flavor
with butter. Serve with something tart, such as vinegar or lemon.


DANDELION

5. Dandelion, both wild and cultivated, is a plant whose leaves are much
used for a vegetable green before the blossoms develop. The wild ones
have the advantage of being cheap, so they should be used if they can be
secured; the cultivated ones, on the other hand, cost as much as spinach
and other greens. The season for dandelions is comparatively short,
lasting only a few weeks in the early spring. Use should therefore be
made of them when they can be procured in order to secure variety for
the menu. When they are desired as cooked greens, prepare them in the
manner explained in Art. 3.

6. Dandelion With Sour Sauce.--If a change in the cooking of dandelion
is desired, it should be prepared with a sour sauce. This method of
preparation is very popular, for besides increasing the food value of
this variety of greens, it improves the flavor very much.

DANDELION WITH SOUR SAUCE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1/2 pk. dandelion
1/2 c. vinegar
4 thin slices bacon
1/2 c. water
2 Tb. flour
1 egg
1 tsp. salt

Clean and wash the dandelion. Cut the slices of bacon into small pieces
and sauté until crisp. Stir the flour and salt into the bacon fat, add
the vinegar and water, and stir until the flour thickens. Add the beaten
egg last, and remove from the fire. Put the dandelion into the pan and
mix well with the hot sauce. If the dandelion is preferred well wilted,
set the pan over the flame, and stir until the dandelion appears as
desired. Serve hot.


ENDIVE

7. ENDIVE is an herb that is used as a salad plant or is cooked and
served with a hot dressing or as greens. The three common varieties of
this green are escarole, chicory, and French endive, all of which have a
slightly bitter taste and may be found in the market from late summer
until early winter. _Escarole_ is a broad-leaved variety that is grown
more or less in a head. _Chicory_, which is shown in Fig. 1, has a small
feathery-edged leaf, and is often bleached by tying the leaves together
at the top, so that the inside ones are very tender. Both of these
varieties may be cooked, but they are also much used for salads. _French
endive_ bears very little resemblance to the other kinds, having
straight, creamy-white leaves that are closely pressed together. It
looks very much like sprouts of some kind, and is entirely bleached in
the process of growth by banking the earth around it. It is never used
for anything except salads and garnishes.

8. Endive is very low in food value, comparing very closely with celery
and cucumbers in this respect. Still, as a salad vegetable, it is worthy
of much more extensive use than is generally made of it. As a rule, its
price is about the same as that of lettuce, so it should be substituted
frequently for lettuce to give variety to the diet. To be most
satisfactory, endive should be bought when it is fresh and unwithered
and kept until used in a cool, damp place. A good plan is to wrap such
vegetables in a damp cloth. If, upon using, endive appears to be
withered, it may be freshened by placing it in a pan of cold water and
allowing it to remain there for a short time.

When endive is used as a salad, it may be served merely with a salad
dressing of some kind or it may be combined with other vegetables before
applying the dressing. Escarole and chicory, which are much used as
greens, should be prepared and cooked according to the directions given
in Art. 3.

 LETTUCES

9. Lettuce is a well-known herb that is much used as a salad vegetable.
There are numerous varieties of lettuce, but these may be reduced to the
two kinds shown in Fig. 2, _leaf lettuce_ on the right and _head
lettuce_ on the left. Leaf lettuce, which is more often used for
garnishing than for any other purpose, has firm, crisp, green, upright
leaves; on the other hand, head lettuce has round leaves forming a
compact head, like cabbage. The outside leaves of head lettuce are
green, but the inside ones are usually bleached by the exclusion of
light, as are those of cabbage and endive. These inside leaves are more
tender than the others, and hence more to be desired as a salad
vegetable than the unbleached variety. In food value, lettuce compares
closely with other varieties of greens and is high in the same mineral
salts that they are. The bleached leaves do not contain so much iron as
the green ones. [Illustration: FIG. 2]

10. As has already been implied, lettuce finds its principal use in
garnishing salads. When used for this purpose, it should be eaten along
with the salad, for it is too valuable to be wasted. Since the coarse
outside leaves of a stalk or a head of lettuce do not look so well as
the tender bleached ones, they are often rejected, but this should not
be done, for use can also be made of them. For instance, such leaves may
be shredded into narrow strips and used as a foundation for salads that
will be just as attractive as those having a single lettuce leaf for a
garnish. When it is realized that the outside leaves are purchased at
the same price as the more delicate parts of the lettuce, it can readily
be understood why they also should be utilized as food.  Most of the
garden varieties of lettuce, especially when they have grown very large,
are frequently cooked as greens. When used in this way, lettuce is
prepared, as are other greens, according to the directions given in Art.
3. This vegetable also makes an appetizing dish when it is prepared with
a sauce and served hot in the same way as dandelion.


SPINACH

11. SPINACH, which is shown in Fig. 1, consists of the large, fleshy,
deep-green leaves of a garden herb much used as a green for food. In
fact, this is one of the most popular varieties of greens and is used
more extensively than any other. Many varieties of spinach are grown,
but all of them are used in just the same way. It is slightly higher in
food value than lettuce and endive, but lower than dandelion. However,
it is a valuable food in the diet because of the large quantity of iron
it contains, and many persons eat it not so much because they like it
but because they believe it is good for them.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

12. Some kinds of spinach do not keep for long periods of time.
Therefore, in order to avoid any waste, spinach should always be very
fresh when purchased and should be used as soon as possible after it is
obtained. It may be prepared in a greater number of ways than most of
the other greens except, perhaps, those used for salads. For instance,
it is served with entrées of various kinds, is combined with meat, ham
and spinach being a much used combination, or is made into a purée by
forcing it through a sieve and then used in the making of soup or
soufflé. Then, again, spinach is often boiled and pressed into small
cups to form molds like the one shown in Fig. 3. Such a mold may be used
to garnish a dish of some sort or, as here shown, may be garnished with
a slice of hard-cooked egg. When spinach is used in any of these ways,
it should first be cooked according to the directions given for the
preparation of greens in Art. 3.  13. SPINACH SOUFFLÉ.--The purée that
is made by forcing boiled spinach through a sieve may be used in a
variety of ways, but none of these is more satisfactory than spinach
soufflé. When made according to the accompanying recipe, spinach soufflé
will be found to be appetizing as well as nourishing.

SPINACH SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
1/2 c. hot milk
2 Tb. flour
1 c. spinach purée
1 tsp. salt
2 egg whites
Dash of pepper

Melt the butter, add the flour, salt, pepper, and hot milk, and stir in
the spinach purée. Beat the egg whites stiff and fold them into the
mixture. Grease individual baking dishes or a large baking dish and fill
two-thirds full with the mixture. Place in a pan of hot water and bake
in a slow oven until firm, or for about 20 or 30 minutes.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

14. SPINACH ROYAL.--A very attractive dish can be made by combining
spinach with toast, hard-cooked egg, and lemon in the manner shown in
Fig. 4. This dish is known as _spinach royal_, and because of the
additional ingredients it is nutritious as well as palatable.

SPINACH ROYAL
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1/2 pk. spinach
1/3 c. water
1-1/2 tsp. salt
3 Tb. bacon fat or butter
3 Tb. flour
1/8 tsp. pepper
Triangular pieces of toast
2 hard-cooked eggs
1 lemon

Look the spinach over carefully and remove all roots and dead leaves.
Cut the stalks apart and wash them thoroughly several times in fresh,
clean water to remove the sand and dirt, lifting the spinach out of the
water each time instead of pouring the water off. Put the spinach into a
saucepan with the water. Stir frequently until the spinach is wilted and
there is sufficient water to boil it. Add 1 teaspoonful of the salt and
cook until the leaves are very tender, or for about 15 or 20 minutes.
Drain off all but about 1/2 cupful of the liquid. Melt the fat in a
frying pan, stir the flour into it, brown to a golden brown, and then
add the spinach, pepper, and remaining salt. Stir and cook until the
flour has thickened and mixed well with the spinach. Turn out in a mound
on a platter and place the pieces of toast around the spinach as shown.
Slice the hard-cooked eggs, cut the lemon into any desirable shape, and
use these to garnish the platter. In serving this dish, put a spoonful
of spinach on a piece of toast and serve a slice or two of egg and lemon
with each portion.

15. CREAMED SPINACH.--After spinach has been boiled until it is tender,
it may be made more appetizing by combining it with a well-flavored
cream sauce, according to the accompanying directions.

CREAMED SPINACH
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1/2 pk. spinach
1/2 tsp. salt
2 Tb. ham or bacon fat
Dash of pepper
2 Tb. flour
2/3 c. milk

Boil the spinach according to the directions given in Art. 3. Melt the
fat in a frying pan, add the flour, salt, pepper, and milk, and stir
until the flour thickens. Chop the cooked spinach and add it to the hot
dressing. Stir and cook until the two are well blended. Serve hot.


WATERCRESS AND PARSLEY

16. WATERCRESS and PARSLEY are two herbs, or greens, that are used
considerably for garnishing and flavoring other dishes. These greens are
shown in Fig. 5, that at the left being watercress and that at the
right parsley.

17. Watercress, which is commonly known as _peppercress_, usually grows
wild in beds along the banks of springs or clear, cool streams. A few
varieties, however, are cultivated, and these are grown in dry soil and
known as _upland cress_. It is a very prolific herb, and may be obtained
from early spring until late in the fall; in fact, it does not freeze
easily and is sometimes found in early winter along the swiftly flowing
streams that are not frozen over. Watercress may be used whenever it can
be procured, but it is not very desirable when in blossom. Its chief use
is to garnish salads and other dishes, but it may also be cooked and
served hot as a green. In such an event, its cooking is accomplished in
the same way as that of other greens.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

18. Parsley, while classified as a green vegetable, is perhaps not in
the true sense of the word a real vegetable, since it is used for only
two purposes, and in neither of these is it served cooked or raw as an
exclusive article of diet. The most important use of parsley is perhaps
that of flavoring. It is added to soups, sauces, and various kinds of
cooked vegetables in order to impart additional flavor. In such cases,
it should be chopped very fine in order that all possible flavor may be
extracted from it. Parsley may also be dried before it is used for this
purpose, provided it must be kept for any length of time. The other use
of parsley is that of garnishing. It is often used in small sprays to
garnish a roast of meat, a steak, chops, fish, or some baked, fried, or
sautéd vegetable. Sometimes it is chopped very fine and placed around
the edge of a patty shell, a croustade, a timbale case, or a piece of
toast upon which food is served. Parsley may be eaten when it is served
as a garnish if its flavor is found to be agreeable to the taste.

 JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES AND THEIR PREPARATION

19. JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES are tubers belonging to the sunflower family.
In appearance they resemble potatoes to some extent, but, as a rule,
they are neither so large nor so smooth. The inside texture of this
vegetable is more moist and not so mealy as that of the Irish potato.
Jerusalem artichokes are easy to grow and are very prolific, so that if
any one is fond of them they will be found to be a profitable crop. For
table use, they are prepared in much the same way as potatoes.

20. CREAMED ARTICHOKES.--A common method of preparing Jerusalem
artichokes is to cream them. Wash and peel the desired number of
artichokes and cut them into 1/2-inch dice. Put these to cook in boiling
salted water and cook until tender enough to be pierced with a fork.
Drain off the water and dress with hot medium white sauce. Serve hot.

21. BUTTERED ARTICHOKES.--Another satisfactory way in which to prepare
Jerusalem artichokes is to dress them with butter. Wash and peel the
required number of artichokes and cut them into slices. Put these to
cook in boiling salted water and cook until tender enough to be pierced
with a fork. Drain off the water and dress with melted butter to which
has been added a little chopped parsley. Serve hot.


KOHLRABI AND ITS PREPARATION

22. KOHLRABI is a variety of cabbage having a turnip-shaped stem. On
account of its shape it is often called _turnip cabbage_. The edible
part of kohlrabi is the enlarged stem, which has the flavor of both
turnip and cabbage. The stems of the leaves are attached to the enlarged
portion that is used for food, and these must be removed in the
preparation of the vegetable. Kohlrabi is not a perishable vegetable and
therefore stands storage very well. For market, it is usually placed in
bunches and tied as are beets and carrots. In food value, this
vegetable, like cabbage, is somewhat low. The food value it does have is
carbohydrate in the form of sugar.  23. After the stems of the leaves
have been cut off, the kohlrabi should be washed and then pared to
remove the outer skin. It is usually diced or sliced thin, and then
cooked and dressed in any desirable way. This vegetable, like cabbage,
cauliflower, etc., should be cooked with the cover removed from the
kettle, in order to allow some of the flavor to escape in the steam.
Kohlrabi that is old or that has been in storage for some time develops
woody portions as do turnips, beets, and other winter vegetables, and
must therefore be cooked sufficiently long to make it palatable.

24. BOILED KOHLRABI.--Persons fond of kohlrabi as a vegetable will
undoubtedly prefer it merely boiled and flavored with butter, pepper,
and salt. When it is to be cooked in this way, prepare it in the manner
just explained. Then put it on to cook in sufficient boiling salted
water to cover it well, and allow it to cook with the cover removed
until it can be easily pierced with a fork. When sufficiently cooked,
pour off the water, season to taste with salt and pepper, and add 1
tablespoonful of butter for each pint of kohlrabi cooked. Serve hot.

25. MASHED KOHLRABI.--As turnips and potatoes are often boiled and then
mashed, so kohlrabi makes a very appetizing dish when prepared in this
way. Prepare the kohlrabi and cook it by boiling. When it has cooked
soft, drain off the water and mash with a wooden or a wire potato
masher. Season with salt and pepper, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter
for each pint of cooked vegetable. Serve hot.

26. CREAMED KOHLRABI.--The preparation of kohlrabi can be varied by
serving it with a cream sauce. Such a sauce also increases the food
value of this vegetable by supplying the substances in which it is low.

CREAMED KOHLRABI
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 c. diced kohlrabi
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. milk

Cook the kohlrabi in boiling salted water until tender and then drain
the water from it. Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the flour, salt,
and pepper, and into this stir the hot milk. Cook until the sauce has
thickened. Then pour it over the kohlrabi and reheat. Serve hot.

 LENTILS AND THEIR PREPARATION

27. LENTILS are the flattish, circular, dried seeds of an annual vine
grown chiefly in Europe and Asia. They belong to the class of vegetables
known as legumes, and are therefore high in protein in the form of
legumin. They also contain a large amount of carbohydrate in the form of
starch and are high in mineral salts. Because of their high food value,
which is somewhat over 1,600 calories to the pound, they are a valuable
food in the diet, particularly as a meat substitute. Consequently, when
lentils can be obtained at a reasonable price, it is wise to make
considerable use of them.

There are three varieties of lentils, _yellow_, _red_, and _black_, and
they resemble split peas in appearance, as will be observed from Fig. 6,
which shows a panful of dried lentils. They have a distinctive flavor
that is agreeable to most persons. However, like other dried legumes,
long cooking is required to make them tender and palatable.

28. COOKING OF LENTILS.--In general, the preparation of lentils is
similar to that of dried beans, the cooking of which is now thoroughly
understood. They may be put on to cook immediately after they are
washed, but, as in the case of dried beans, their cooking may be
hastened if they are first softened by soaking them in cold water for 8
to 12 hours. At the end of this time, it is advisable to parboil the
lentils for about 10 or 15 minutes, or until their outer skins begin to
crack, in water to which a pinch of soda has been added. This water
being poured off, the lentils should be washed and then put to cook in
fresh water to which 1 teaspoonful of salt is added for each quart of
water used. Like beans, the lentils should be cooked slowly until they
are soft enough to crush between the fingers. With these principles for
the cooking of lentils well in mind, the housewife will have no
difficulty in preparing this vegetable, for almost any of the recipes
given for dried beans may be used with lentils substituted for
the beans.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]  29. LENTIL PUFF.--A decided change from the
usual ways of preparing lentils can be had by making lentil puff. Black
lentils are used for this preparation, and they are made into a purée
before being used in the puff. If the accompanying recipe is carefully
followed, a most appetizing, as well as nutritious, dish will be
the result.

LENTIL PUFF
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1-1/4 c. lentil purée
1-1/2 c. riced potatoes
2 Tb. butter
1/2 c. milk
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 eggs

Soak the lentils overnight in water that contains a pinch of soda,
parboil them for about 10 minutes, and pour off the water. Put them to
cook in cold water and cook until they are tender, allowing the water to
evaporate completely, if possible, so that the purée made from them will
be dry. However, if any water remains when the lentils are done, pour it
off and use it for soup or sauce. Make the purée by forcing the cooked
lentils through a colander. If it is found to be too wet, less milk can
be used than the recipe calls for. Cook several potatoes and rice them
by forcing them through a colander or a ricer. Combine the lentils and
potatoes, and to this mixture add the butter, milk, salt, and pepper.
Separate the eggs, and beat the yolks slightly and the whites until
stiff. Stir the yolks into the mixture and, just before putting the puff
into the oven, fold in the whites. Pour into a buttered baking dish, set
in the oven, and bake until the puff is set and the surface is brown.
Serve hot.


MUSHROOMS AND THEIR PREPARATION

30. Mushrooms are not a vegetable; still they are included in this
Section because they are used like a vegetable. In reality, they are a
fungus growth containing no chlorophyl, or green coloring matter, and,
as shown in Fig. 7, consisting of an erect stalk that supports a
cap-like expansion. They occur in many varieties, both poisonous and
non-poisonous. The non-poisonous, or edible, mushrooms are found on
rich, moist pastures all over the world and they are also very
frequently cultivated. They may be collected in almost any locality, but
no person who is not perfectly familiar with their characteristics and
therefore able to judge the non-poisonous kinds from the poisonous
should attempt to gather them. Fresh mushrooms can usually be found in
the markets, but as they are expensive, they should be considered a
luxury and used only occasionally. Instead, some of the small canned
varieties, which are usually satisfactory for most purposes, should be
used when mushrooms are desired and the wild ones cannot be secured.

31. In food value, mushrooms are not very high, being about equal to
beets or carrots in this respect; but they have a higher percentage of
protein than these vegetables and they contain extractives similar to
those found in meat. To increase their food value, mushrooms are often
combined with other foods, such as peas, chestnuts, diced meats, and
fowl, and made into dishes of various sorts. Then, again, they are
served as a garnish with steaks and other meat dishes. In short, if they
can be secured from the surrounding neighborhood or the price is not
prohibitive, they should be used in the many excellent ways that are
devised for their preparation.

32. PREPARATION FOR COOKING.--To prepare mushrooms for cooking, clean
them by brushing them carefully with a soft brush, by scraping the
surface, and, in some cases, by removing the stems. Do not, however,
throw the stems away, for they may be used as well as the caps. If the
mushrooms are found to be tough, the skin should be peeled off. After
being thus prepared, mushrooms may be cooked in various ways, as is
explained in the accompanying recipes. [Illustration: FIG. 7]

33. BROILED MUSHROOMS.--One of the simplest methods of cooking mushrooms
is to broil them. This may be done either by exposing them directly to
the heat or by pan-broiling them. In this recipe, only the caps
are used.

Clean the mushrooms that are to be broiled and remove the stems. Place
the caps in a broiler that has been greased or in a slightly greased
frying pan. Brown them on one side, then turn them and brown them on the
other side. Remove to a platter, dot with butter, season with salt and
pepper, and serve.  34. STEWED MUSHROOMS.--Another very simple way in
which to cook mushrooms is to stew them and then serve them on toast.
When prepared by this method, both the stems and the caps are utilized.

Clean the mushrooms and cut both the caps and the stems into small
pieces. Cook until tender in sufficient water, stock, or milk to cover
them well, and then season with salt and pepper. To the liquid that
remains, add enough flour to thicken it slightly. Serve on toast.

35. SAUTÉD MUSHROOMS.--When mushrooms are sautéd, they are often used
with other dishes, particularly broiled steak, to improve the flavor and
give variety. In fact, steak smothered with mushrooms is considered a
luxury. However, sautéd mushrooms are very frequently served alone or,
together with a sauce made from the fat in which they are cooked, they
are served on toast.

Clean the mushrooms, remove the stems, and dredge both stems and caps
with flour. Melt fat in the frying pan and place the dredged mushrooms
in it. Sauté until brown on both sides and season with salt, pepper, and
chopped parsley. Serve in any desired manner. If sauce is desired, add
water or stock to the flour and fat that remain in the frying pan, and
allow this to cook for a few minutes.

36. CREAMED MUSHROOMS AND CHESTNUTS.--No more delightful combination can
be imagined than mushrooms and chestnuts. When combined with a cream
sauce and served in patty shells or timbale cases, a dish suitable for
the daintiest meal is the result. Another very attractive way in which
to serve this combination is to place it in a baking dish, or, as shown
in Fig. 8, in individual baking dishes, cover it with a layer of biscuit
or pastry crust, bake, and serve it as a pie.

CREAMED MUSHROOMS AND CHESTNUTS
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1-1/2 c. stewed chestnuts
1-1/2 c. stewed mushrooms
3 Tb. butter
3 Tb. flour
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1-1/2 c. milk

Remove the shells from the required number of Italian chestnuts and
cook the nut meats in boiling water until tender. Peel off the skins and
break the chestnuts into pieces. If fresh mushrooms are used, stew them
in boiling water until tender. Cut the stewed or canned mushrooms into
pieces of the same size as the chestnuts, and mix the two together. Make
a cream sauce by melting the butter, adding the flour, salt, and pepper,
and stirring in the hot milk. Cook until the mixture thickens, pour it
over the chestnuts and mushrooms, and serve in any of the ways
suggested.


OKRA AND ITS PREPARATION

[Illustration: FIG. 9]

37. OKRA is a fruit vegetable consisting of a green pod that is several
inches long, pointed at one end, and filled with seeds. Fig. 9 shows
okra pods attached to the herb of which they are a part. Although okra
originated in Africa, it is for the most part grown in the southern
section of the United States. However, canned okra may be obtained
almost anywhere. Okra is low in food value, being only slightly higher
than cabbage and most of the greens; nevertheless, it is liked by many
persons. It is of a mucilaginous, or gummy, consistency, and if it is
not properly cooked it becomes very slimy and is then decidedly
unpleasant. Because of its gummy nature, it helps to thicken any dish to
which it is added. Probably its chief use is as an ingredient in soups,
when it is known as _gumbo_. Chicken gumbo soup is one of the most
popular dishes of this kind.  The preliminary preparation of okra is
the same as that of most other vegetables; that is, the pods should be
washed, the stems removed, and the cleaned pods then cooked in
sufficient boiling salted water to cover them well.

38. STEWED OKRA.--The simplest way in which to prepare okra is to stew
it. When seasoned well with salt, pepper, and butter, stewed okra finds
much favor with those who care for this vegetable.

Select the required number of okra pods and put them on to cook in
enough boiling salted water to cover them well. Cook until the pods are
soft enough to be easily pierced with a fork. Season with pepper and, if
necessary, additional salt, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter for each
four persons to be served.

39. OKRA WITH TOMATOES.--If one does not desire a dish made entirely of
okra, it may be combined with tomatoes. Such a combination, seasoned
well and flavored with ham or bacon fat, makes a very tasty dish.

OKRA WITH TOMATOES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1-1/2 c. stewed or canned okra
1-1/2 c. stewed or canned tomatoes
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. ham or bacon fat

Heat the okra and tomatoes together in a saucepan and add the salt,
pepper, and ham or bacon fat. Cook for 5 or 10 minutes or until well
blended. Serve hot.


ONIONS AND THEIR PREPARATION

VARIETIES OF THE ONION FAMILY

40. ONIONS are the chief commercial vegetable of the bulb crops. They
have been cultivated from the earliest times, their native country being
Central Asia. Closely allied to the onion are several other bulb
vegetables, including garlic, shallots, leeks, and chives, all of which
are used more extensively for flavoring dishes than for any other
purpose. Fig. 10 shows several varieties of this family, the group of
three in the upper right corner being garlic; the bunch in the lower
right corner, leeks; the bunch in the lower left corner, green onions;
and the remainder of those shown in the illustration, different
varieties of dried onions, that is, onions that have been allowed
to mature.

41. This entire class of food is characterized by a typical, volatile
oil, which in most cases is so strong as to be somewhat irritating and
which causes the vegetable to disagree with many persons. This flavor,
however, can be almost entirely dissipated by cooking, so that many
persons who cannot eat the various members of the onion family raw can
tolerate them cooked. In food value, which is found principally as
carbohydrate in the form of sugar, this class of foods is not very high,
being about the same as carrots, beets, and other root vegetables. Some
persons believe that onions have wonderful medicinal value in curing
colds and preventing them, but there is really no foundation for such
a belief.

[Illustration: Fig. 10]

42. ONIONS.--As has been pointed out, onions are of two general
varieties, dried and green. _Dried onions_, as shown in Fig. 10, are
those which have been allowed to grow to maturity and have then been
cured, or dried, to a certain extent. Such onions are in demand at all
seasons. _Green onions_, also shown in Fig. 10, are those which are
pulled, or taken out of the ground, before they have matured and are
eaten while fresh. They are especially popular in the spring, although
they have a rather long season. Each of these classes has many
varieties, which vary in flavor and in color, some of the dried ones
being yellow, some red, and others white. All dried onions have
excellent keeping qualities, so, after purchasing, no special care need
be given to them except to store them in a comparatively cool, dry
place. Deterioration is due chiefly to sprouting, for as soon as the new
plant begins to grow from the center of the onion, the remainder becomes
soft and loses much of its flavor. The green, immature onions, however,
will not keep for any length of time, and in order to keep them fresh
until they are used, they must be stored in a cool, damp place.

[Illustration: FIG. 11]

43. GARLIC.--The variety of onion known as garlic is very much desired
by the people of southern Europe, where it originated. As Fig. 10 shows,
it resembles the onion in appearance, but it consists of several parts,
or small bulbs, called _cloves_, which are encased in a covering of thin
white skin. Garlic has a very strong penetrating odor and a biting taste
that resemble the odor and taste of onion, but that are much ranker. It
is little used by Americans except as a flavoring for salads and various
kinds of highly seasoned meats. In reality, a very small amount of
garlic is sufficient to lend enough flavor, and so the bowl in which a
salad is served is often merely rubbed with garlic before the salad is
put into it. No difficulty will be experienced in recognizing garlic in
the markets, for here it is found in long strings that are made by
braiding the dry stems together.

44. SHALLOTS.--Closely allied to garlic are shallots, which are native
to Syria, where they still grow wild. They are said to have been brought
into Europe by the Crusaders. The bulbs of this vegetable are similar to
those of garlic, being compound in form, but instead of being enclosed
in a thin covering, they are separate when mature, as Fig. 11 shows.
Shallots have a strong flavor, but it is not so rank as that of garlic,
nor does the odor remain in the mouth so long as that of onion. Many
persons like shallots for flavoring stews, soups, salads, and pickles.

45. LEEKS.--Another member of the onion family that is more highly
prized and more extensively raised in Europe than in the United States
is leeks. As Fig. 10 shows, leeks do not produce a bulb as do onions. In
this vegetable, the lower parts of the leaves grow close together and
form a bulb-like stem, or neck, which is fairly solid and which
constitutes the edible part. The odor and flavor of leeks are similar to
those of onions, but they are somewhat weaker. The fleshy stem may be
bleached by banking it with earth, and when this is done, the flavor
becomes more mild and the texture more tender than in the onion bulb.
Like shallots, leeks are used to flavor stews, soups, and similar foods.

46. CHIVES.--The member of the onion family known as chives is a small
plant whose roots remain in the ground for many years and produce year
after year dense tufts of slender, hollow leaves. These leaves grow to a
height of about 6 or 8 inches and resemble the tops of onions except
that they are much smaller. Chives, which have a more delicate flavor
than onions, are much used for flavoring soup, stews, salads, meats, and
other vegetables and as a garnish for salads. When used for any of these
purposes, they are cut into tiny pieces.


PREPARATION OF ONIONS

47. ONIONS FOR FLAVORING.--When only the flavor of onions is desired in
a salad or a cooked dish of some sort, such as a dressing for fowl,
hash, or any similar combination of food ingredients, the onion should
be added in the form of juice and pulp rather than in pieces. Then it
will not be possible to observe the onion when it is mixed with the food
nor to come across small pieces of it when the food is eaten. To prepare
an onion in this way, peel it, cut off a crosswise slice, and then grate
the onion on a grater over a shallow dish. Add the juice and pulp thus
obtained to any food that calls for onion as a flavoring.

48. ONIONS FOR THE TABLE.--When onions are to be used as a vegetable for
the table, they require cooking, but first of all they must be peeled.
This is at best a rather unpleasant task, because the fumes from the
strong volatile oil are irritating to both the eyes and the nostrils.
However, it may be done more comfortably by keeping the onions immersed
in cold water during the peeling. Remove only the dry outside shells,
and, if the onions are large, cut them in halves or quarters. However,
as the various layers are likely to fall apart when the onion is cut, it
is advisable to select medium-sized or small onions, for these may be
cooked whole. After the onions have been peeled, they may be cooked in a
variety of ways.

49. BOILED ONIONS.--Perhaps the simplest method of cooking onions is to
boil them. To allow the strong volatile oil to escape instead of being
reabsorbed by the onions, and thus improve the flavor of the onions, the
cover should be kept off the vessel while they are cooking. The water in
which this vegetable is cooked has not a very agreeable flavor, so no
use should be made of it.

Peel the desired number of onions and if necessary cut them into halves
or quarters. Place them in sufficient boiling water to cover well. Cook
in an uncovered vessel until tender enough to be easily pierced with a
fork, but not so soft as to fall apart. Then pour off the water, season
with more salt, if necessary, and a little pepper, and add 1
tablespoonful of butter for each four persons to be served. Serve hot.

50. CREAMED ONIONS.--A cream sauce added to onions makes a very
appetizing dish. In fact, most persons prefer creamed onions to any
other method of preparation.

CREAMED ONIONS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 pt. stewed onions
3 Tb. butter
3 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1-1/2 c. hot milk

Prepare the onions according to the directions given in Art. 49. When
they are tender enough to be easily pierced with a fork, drain. Melt the
butter, and add the flour, salt, pepper, and hot milk. Cook until the
sauce thickens, pour over the stewed onions, heat together for a few
minutes, and serve.

51. BAKED ONIONS.--If variety in the preparation of onions is desired,
baked onions should be tried. Select medium-sized onions, peel them, and
then boil them whole in boiling salted water until they are almost
tender. Drain off the water, place the onions in a shallow dish, brush
with butter, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Place in a hot oven and
bake until brown on one side; then turn them and brown on the other
side. Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 12]  52. STUFFED ONIONS.--When large onions can be
secured, a very appetizing as well as attractive dish can be prepared by
stuffing them and then baking them brown. Onions cooked in this way will
appear as shown in Fig. 12.

STUFFED ONIONS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 large onions
1 c. dried bread crumbs
2 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/2 tsp. celery salt
1/4 c. milk

Peel the onions and cook them in boiling salted water until almost
tender. Remove from the water and take out the inner portions of the
onions, leaving the outside layers in the shape of a cup. Chop the
portions of the onions which have been removed and mix with the bread
crumbs. Melt the butter, add to it the chopped onion, bread crumbs,
salt, pepper, and celery salt, and stir all together for a few minutes
over the flame. Add the milk, and if the 1/4 cupful is not sufficient to
make the stuffing moist, add more. Fill the onion shells with the
stuffing, place in a hot oven, and bake until brown. Serve immediately.


PARSNIPS AND THEIR PREPARATION

53. Parsnips are an important root vegetable, being closely allied to
carrots. They are used to a certain extent during the summer when they
are immature, but generally they are allowed to mature so that they may
be stored for use as a winter vegetable. Parsnips have an advantage over
many vegetables in that they have excellent keeping qualities and are
particularly hardy, being able to withstand considerable freezing and
thawing when they are left in the ground during the winter. However, as
they grow older, they develop a woody texture, as do beets and turnips,
and so at the end of the winter require longer cooking than at the
beginning.

54. In food value, parsnips are somewhat higher than other root
vegetables, containing a large amount of carbohydrate, which occurs in
the form of sugar. Although they are wholesome and nourishing, they have
a peculiar, sweetish flavor that is due to the volatile oil they contain
and is objectionable to some persons. Still, those who are fond of this
flavor find that parsnips afford an excellent opportunity to give
variety to the diet, for they may be prepared in a number of ways, most
of which are similar to the ways in which carrots are cooked.

55. In preparing parsnips for cooking, scrape them, if possible, instead
of peeling them, so as not to waste any of the edible material. Then,
too, try to obtain medium-sized parsnips, for they will be of much
better quality than the larger ones. If uneven sizes must be used, the
larger ones should be cut before being cooked, so that they will be
similar in size to the smaller ones and therefore cook in the same
length of time.

56. MASHED PARSNIPS.--A very simple way in which to prepare parsnips is
to mash them. Clean and scrape the desired number of parsnips and put
them to cook in sufficient boiling salted water to cover. Cook until
tender enough to be pierced with a fork, the length of time required to
do this depending entirely on the age of the parsnips. When tender,
drain off the water and force the parsnips through a colander or a
sieve. Season with butter, salt, and pepper, and serve hot.

57. CREAMED PARSNIPS.--Parsnips are sometimes cut into dice and then
served with a cream, sauce. When it is desired to prepare them in this
way, the accompanying directions should be carefully followed.

CREAMED PARSNIPS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. diced parsnips
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 c. milk

Clean and scrape the parsnips and cut them into dice 1/2 inch in size.
Put these to cook in sufficient boiling salted water to cover, cook
until they may be easily pierced with a fork, and then drain. Melt the
butter in a double boiler, and add the flour, salt, and pepper. Stir in
the hot milk, and cook until the mixture thickens. Pour this sauce over
the parsnips, heat together for a few minutes, and serve.

58. BROWNED PARSNIPS.--Parsnips that are browned and sweetened with
sugar seem to meet with greater favor than those prepared by other
methods. To prepare them in this way, clean and scrape the desired
number of parsnips, and slice them in thick slices, or, if they are
small, cut them in halves lengthwise. Put them to cook in boiling salted
water and cook until they may be easily pierced with a fork, but are not
tender enough to fall to pieces. Melt some fat in a frying pan, and
place the slices of cooked parsnips in it. Brown on one side, turn, and
then brown on the other. Sprinkle with a little sugar and, if necessary,
additional salt. Serve.


PEAS AND THEIR PREPARATION

59. In addition to beans and lentils, the class of vegetables called
legumes includes PEAS, which, both green and dried, are used for food.
In composition, there is a decided difference between the two varieties
of peas, the green ones being about equal to green corn in food value,
and the dried ones having a food value nearly four times as great. In
each case, the food substance in the greatest amount is in the form of
carbohydrate. In green peas, this is in the form of sugar, while in
dried ones it is changed into starch. Peas also contain protein in the
form of legumin, there being three times as much of this substance in
dried peas as in green ones. The amount found in green peas is
sufficient to be of importance in the diet, but the percentage of this
substance is so great in dried peas that they may be used very
satisfactorily as a meat substitute.

60. GREEN PEAS.--Numerous varieties of green peas are found on the
market. A few of them are cooked in the pods, especially when the peas
are very young, and are eaten pods and all, just as are string beans.
Most of them, however, are allowed to mature further and only the peas
are eaten, the shell being discarded.

When green peas are purchased, they are always found in the pods. For
the peas to be most satisfactory, the pods should be fresh and green and
should appear to be well filled. Flat-looking pods mean that the peas
have not matured sufficiently. After being purchased, the peas should
not be removed from the pods until they are to be cooked. However, if it
is necessary that they stand for any length of time after they are
shelled, they should be kept in a cool place in order to prevent them
from shriveling. Their cooking is similar to that of any other fresh
vegetable; that is, they should be cooked in boiling salted water in a
covered vessel until they are tender enough to be easily crushed between
the fingers or pierced with a fork. With this preliminary preparation,
they may be dressed in any desirable manner.

61. DRIED PEAS.--Dried peas, because of their nature, require a
different kind of preparation from green peas. In fact, their cooking is
similar to that of dried beans. They require long slow cooking and are
improved if they are first parboiled in water to which a pinch of soda
has been added. They are not used extensively except in the making of
soups or occasionally for a purée or a soufflé, but as they are very
high in food value and can be used as a meat substitute, they should
have a prominent place in the dietary of most families. Many of the ways
in which dried beans and lentils are prepared are fully as applicable in
the case of dried peas.

62. GREEN PEAS WITH BUTTER.--When peas are young and tender, no more
appetizing way to prepare them can be found than to boil them and then
serve them with butter.

Select fresh green peas with full pods, wash in cold water, and remove
the peas from the shells. Put to cook in enough boiling salted water to
cover well, and cook until tender. Pour off all but a small amount of
the water, using the part poured off for making soup or sauce. Add 1
tablespoonful of butter for each four persons to be served, and season
with additional salt if necessary and a dash of pepper. Serve hot.

63. GREEN PEAS ENGLISH STYLE.--If the flavor of mint is agreeable, green
peas prepared English style will undoubtedly find favor. Cook them as
for green peas with butter, but, at the time the butter is added, add 1
tablespoonful of finely chopped fresh mint. Season with additional salt,
if necessary, and pepper, allow all to simmer together for a few
minutes, and serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

64. CREAMED PEAS.--A cream sauce adds considerable food value and flavor
to green peas. Peas prepared in this way may be served plain, but they
can be made very attractive by serving them in croustades, as shown in
Fig. 13. As already learned, _croustades_ are cases made from large
pieces of bread that are cut any desired shape, hollowed out, and then
toasted in a hot oven or on a broiler or fried in deep fat until crisp.

CREAMED PEAS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. shelled green peas
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1/2 c. water from peas
1/2 c. milk

Cook the peas in boiling salted water until tender, and then drain the
water from them, retaining 1/2 cupful for the sauce. Melt the butter,
add the flour, salt, and pepper, and stir in the hot liquids. Cook until
the flour has thickened and then pour over the peas. Serve hot, either
plain or in croustades.

65. PEAS IN TURNIP CUPS.--A somewhat unusual dish can be prepared by
making cups out of turnips, filling them with peas, and then pouring a
cream sauce over the peas. Besides being attractive, this combination
makes a very palatable vegetable dish.

Select a sufficient number of medium-sized white turnips. Wash them
thoroughly, and then hollow out the inside of each, leaving cup-shaped
shells about 1/4 inch thick. Cook these shells in boiling salted water
until tender, but not tender enough to break into pieces, and remove
from the water. Then, according to the directions given in Art. 60, cook
enough green peas to fill the cups. When tender, fill the cups with the
peas and over them pour a medium white sauce. Serve hot.  66. PEAS
PURÉE.--Many persons who cannot eat peas because of the coarse outside
skins are able to digest them in the form of a purée. To prepare them in
this way, boil fresh peas in the manner explained in Art. 60. When they
are tender, force them through a purée sieve or a fine-mesh wire sieve.
The pulp will pass through the sieve, but the coarse skins will remain.
The purée thus made may be used for soup or in the making of a soufflé.

67. PEAS SOUFFLÉ.--Nothing in the way of peas is more appetizing and at
the same time more easily digested than peas soufflé. This may be baked
in a large baking dish, or it may be divided and baked in individual
baking dishes.

PEAS SOUFFLÉ
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 c. milk
1 c. peas purée
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
2 eggs

Melt the butter, stir in the flour, and add the heated milk. Cook until
the mixture thickens and then add the peas purée, salt, and pepper.
Separate the eggs, beat the yolks and add them to the mixture, and then
fold in the stiffly beaten whites. Pour into a well-greased baking dish
or individual baking dishes, place in a pan of hot water, and bake in a
slow oven until set, or for 30 or 40 minutes. Serve at once.


PEPPERS AND THEIR PREPARATION

68. PEPPERS are one of the fruit vegetables. Some varieties of them are
dried and used as a condiment, that is, to season or give relish to
food, but as they are never used as a vegetable, they are not included
here. It is the sweet varieties of peppers which are used as vegetables
and to which reference is made in these discussions. They are valuable
chiefly for two reasons: to flavor various kinds of dishes, such as
entrées, salads, etc., and to make a dish more attractive in appearance
because of the contrast in color they afford. In food value, they are
about equal to the various greens, but as a rule such small quantities
of them are eaten that they cannot be regarded as a food.

69. STUFFED PEPPERS.--The usual way of preparing peppers as a vegetable
is to stuff them and then bake them, when they will appear as in Fig.
14. The stuffing may be made of various kinds of material, such as
pieces of meat, vegetables, cereals, etc., and so affords an excellent
way to utilize left-overs of any of these foods. Two recipes for
stuffing are here given, and either one may be used with equally
good results.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

To prepare peppers for stuffing, wash them in cold water and remove the
tops by cutting around the peppers a short distance from the stem.
Remove the pulp and seeds from the inside, and wash the peppers
thoroughly to make sure that no loose seeds remain. Fill with the
desired stuffing, place in a shallow pan with a small amount of water,
and bake until the peppers are soft enough to be pierced with a fork.
The water permits the peppers to steam during the first part of the
cooking. Serve hot.

STUFFING NO. 1
(Sufficient for Six Peppers)

2 Tb. ham fat
1 small chopped onion
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1-1/2 c. steamed rice
1/2 c. bread crumbs
1/2 c. finely chopped boiled ham
Milk

Melt the fat in a frying pan, add the onion, salt, and pepper, and heat
together for several minutes. Add the rice, bread crumbs, and ham, and
moisten with milk until the mixture is of the right consistency. Use to
fill the peppers.

STUFFING NO. 2
(Sufficient for Six Peppers)

2 Tb. butter
1 onion, chopped
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
2 c. stale bread crumbs
2 Tb. chopped parsley
1 tsp. celery salt
Milk

Melt the butter in a frying pan, add the chopped onion, salt, and
pepper, and heat together. To this add the bread crumbs, chopped
parsley, and celery salt, and moisten with enough milk to make the
stuffing of the right consistency. Use to stuff peppers.


POTATOES AND THEIR PREPARATION

WHITE POTATOES

70. WHITE POTATOES, popularly called _Irish potatoes_ because they are a
staple food in Ireland, belong to the class of tuber vegetables. They
form such an extensive part of the diets of the majority of people that
they are generally considered the most important vegetable used by
civilized man. They are usually roundish or oblong in shape and have a
whitish interior and a darker colored skin.

71. FOOD VALUE OF POTATOES.--In food value, Irish potatoes are
comparatively high, being in this respect about two and one-half times
as great as an equal weight of cabbage, but not quite twice as great as
the various root vegetables, such as carrots, parsnips, etc. The largest
amount of this food value occurs as carbohydrate in the form of starch,
there being almost no fat and very little protein in potatoes. The
starch granules of potatoes are larger than the starch granules of any
of the cereals, the class of foods highest in this food substance, and
it is the proper cooking of this starch that makes potatoes dry and
mealy. Potatoes also contain a large amount of mineral salts, much of
which lies directly under the skin. Therefore, the most economical way
in which to prepare potatoes is to cook them with the skins on, for then
all of the mineral salts are retained and none of the material
is wasted.

72. SELECTION OF POTATOES.--The new potato crop begins to come into the
market during the summer, when potatoes are especially appetizing.
However, as potatoes can be easily stored and kept very well for a
considerable time, they form a large part of the winter food supply. If
there is sufficient storage space, it is a wise plan to buy a large
enough supply of potatoes in the fall to last for several months and
then to store them for the winter. However, when this is done, care
should be taken in the selection.

In the first place, the outside skin should be smooth and not scaly.
Then, if possible, potatoes of medium size should be selected, rather
than small ones or large ones. The small ones are not so satisfactory,
because of the greater proportion of waste in peeling, while the very
large ones are apt to have a hollow space in the center. To judge the
quality of potatoes, a few of those to be purchased should be secured
and cooked before a large number of them are bought. The soil and
climatic conditions affect the quality of potatoes to such an extent
that a particular kind of potato which may have been excellent last year
may be entirely different in quality this year. A housewife cannot,
therefore, be guided entirely by her previous knowledge of a certain
kind of potato.

73. CARE OF POTATOES.--Potatoes bought in quantity should be kept in a
cool place and should be excluded from the light. Such care will usually
prevent them from discoloring and sprouting. In case they should sprout,
the sprouts should be removed at once, for the potatoes will deteriorate
rapidly with such a growth. If the potatoes freeze, they may be thawed
by putting them in cold water. Such potatoes, which are characterized by
a peculiar sweetish taste, should be used as soon as possible after
being thawed.

74. PREPARATION OF POTATOES.--As has already been explained, the most
economical way in which to cook potatoes is with the skins on. However,
when it is desired to remove the skins, they should be taken off as
thinly as possible. New potatoes may be scraped, but completely matured
potatoes that have been out of the ground for some time do not scrape
easily and so should be pared thinly.

Potatoes lend themselves to various methods of cookery, and this is
well, for although this is a food of which most persons do not tire
easily, variety in the preparation of a vegetable so commonly used as
the Irish potato is very much to be desired. When cooked in the skins,
potatoes may be boiled, baked, or steamed. When the skins are removed,
potatoes may be cooked in these ways, as well as fried, sautéd,
scalloped, creamed, etc.

75. BOILED POTATOES.--Without doubt, potatoes are cooked more often by
boiling than by any other method, for besides being eaten in this way a
great deal, they must first be boiled for many of the more elaborate
methods of preparation. If the skins are removed before boiling, the
water in which the potatoes are cooked contains a quantity of starch and
a great deal of soluble mineral matter that are lost from the potatoes.
Use should therefore be made of this liquid, it being very satisfactory
for soups, sauces, and the liquid required in bread making.

When potatoes are to be boiled, select the desired number of
medium-sized potatoes, and wash them in cold water. If desired, remove
the peelings with a sharp paring knife, but if the potatoes are to be
cooked with the skins on, scrub them thoroughly with a vegetable brush
in order to remove all dirt. Put to cook in a sufficient amount of
boiling salted water to cover well, and cook until the potatoes are
tender enough to be easily pierced with a fork. Usually the kettle in
which potatoes are cooked is covered, but if desired they may be cooked
in an uncovered vessel. When done, drain the water from the potatoes and
serve at once or use for some of the other methods of preparation.

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

76. MASHED POTATOES.--If mashed potatoes are prepared properly, they are
much relished by the majority of persons. However, to be most
satisfactory, they should be cooked long enough not to be lumpy and
then, after being mashed and softened with milk, they should be beaten
until they are light and creamy.

Peel the desired number of potatoes and boil them according to the
directions given in Art. 75. When they are tender, remove them from the
fire and drain off the water. Mash the potatoes with a wooden or a wire
potato masher, being careful to reduce all the particles to a pulpy mass
in order to prevent lumps. However, the preferable way to mash them is
to force them through a ricer, when they will appear as shown in Fig.
15, for then, if they are thoroughly cooked, there will be no danger of
lumps. When they are sufficiently mashed, season with additional salt, a
dash of pepper, and a small piece of butter, and add hot milk until they
are thinned to a mushy consistency, but not too soft to stand up well
when dropped from a spoon. Then beat the potatoes vigorously with a
large spoon until they become light and fluffy. Serve at once.

77. BAKED POTATOES.--A very nutritious vegetable dish results when
potatoes are baked. For this method of cooking potatoes, those of medium
size are better than large ones; also, if the potatoes are uniform in
size, all of them will bake in the same length of time. It is well to
choose for baking, potatoes that are smooth and unblemished, in order
that they may be prepared without cutting the skins. As the starchy
particles of the potato are cooked by the heated water inside the
potato, the cooking cannot be done so successfully when the skin is cut
or marred, for then the water will evaporate.

Prepare the potatoes by scrubbing them thoroughly; then place them on a
shallow pan and set them in the oven or place them directly on the oven
grate. The temperature of the oven is important in baking potatoes. If
it is too hot, the skins of the potatoes will become charred, and if it
is not hot enough, too long a time will be required for the baking. The
temperature found to produce the best results is about 400 degrees
Fahrenheit, or the same as that for the baking of bread. Turn the
potatoes once or twice during the baking, so that they will bake evenly.
Allow them to bake until it is possible to pierce them to the center
with a fork or they are soft enough to dent easily when pinched with the
tips of the fingers. The latter is the preferable test, for when the
potato is pierced, so much of the moisture is lost that it is not likely
to be of the best quality when served. Upon removing from the oven,
serve at once. Baked potatoes become soggy upon standing. If desired,
they may be rolled to soften the contents of the shell and then cut open
on one side, and pepper, salt, and paprika put into the potato.

The length of time required for baking potatoes is usually 10 to 15
minutes longer than is necessary to cook potatoes of the same size in
water. However, the time for baking may be decreased by boiling the
potatoes for about 5 minutes before they are put in the oven. In such an
event, the boiling and the baking should be accomplished in about
35 minutes.

78. STUFFED POTATOES.--An attractive way in which to serve baked
potatoes is shown in Fig. 16. After the potatoes are thoroughly baked,
the contents are removed, treated as mashed potatoes, and then stuffed
into the shells and set in the oven to brown for a few minutes. When
something different in the way of potatoes is desired, stuffed potatoes
should be tried.

Bake the desired number of potatoes until tender. Remove from the oven,
cut through the skin of each from end to end with a sharp knife, and
scrape out the contents of the shell. Mash the pulp according to the
directions given in Art. 76. Then fill the shells with the mashed
potatoes, allowing the surface to stand up roughly, as shown, instead of
smoothing it down. Dot each with butter, sprinkle a little paprika over
the tops, and replace in the oven. Bake until the surface is nicely
browned and then serve at once.

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

79. BROWNED POTATOES.--While not so easy to digest as boiled or baked
potatoes, browned potatoes offer an opportunity for a change from the
usual ways of preparing this vegetable. They may be prepared on the
stove or in the oven, but when browned in the oven the surface is more
likely to be tough.

Boil the desired number of potatoes, and when they are sufficiently
tender, drain off the water. If they are to be sautéd on the stove, melt
a small amount of fat in a frying pan, and place the cooked potatoes in
it. Sauté until brown on one side, then turn and brown on the other.
Season with additional salt, if necessary, and serve.

In case it is desired to brown them in the oven, put the boiled potatoes
in a shallow pan and brush them over with butter. Set them in a hot
oven, allow them to brown on one side, then turn and brown them on the
other. Season with salt, if necessary, and serve at once upon removing
from the oven.  80. RAW SAUTÉD POTATOES.--If a potato dish suitable for
supper or luncheon is desired, raw potatoes may be sliced thin, as at
_a_, Fig. 17, and then sautéd. For this purpose, small potatoes that are
not suitable for other methods of preparation may be used.

Peel the potatoes and slice them into thin slices. Melt a small amount
of fat in a frying pan, place the potatoes in the hot fat, and cover the
pan. Allow them to steam in this way for 10 to 15 minutes and then
remove the cover. Brown on one side; then turn and brown on the other.
Season with salt and pepper.

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

81. HASH-BROWNED POTATOES.--A very good way in which to use up boiled
potatoes is to hash-brown them in the oven.

HASH-BROWNED POTATOES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 medium-sized cooked potatoes
1-1/2 tsp. salt
2 Tb. butter
3 Tb. milk
1/4 tsp. pepper

Slice or chop the cold potatoes, place in a buttered pan, add the salt
and pepper, melt the butter, and pour it over them. Place in a hot oven
until nicely browned. Stir, add the milk, and brown again. Stir again,
brown the third time, and serve.

82. POTATO PATTIES.--Mashed potatoes, whether left over or boiled and
mashed especially for the purpose, may be made up into patties and then
sautéd until brown on both sides.

POTATO PATTIES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. mashed potato
1 egg
Fine bread crumbs

To the mashed potatoes that have been well seasoned, add the egg and
mix thoroughly. Shape into flat, round patties and roll in the bread
crumbs. Melt fat in a frying pan, place the patties in it, sauté on one
side until brown, and then turn and brown on the other side. Serve hot.

83. FRENCH FRIED POTATOES.--Many families are deprived of French fried
potatoes because the majority of housewives think they are difficult to
prepare. This, however, is not the case, for when the procedure is
understood nothing is easier.

Peel the required number of potatoes and cut them into the desired
shape. Great variety exists in the method of cutting potatoes for this
purpose. However, the form that is usually thought of when French fried
potatoes are mentioned is the one obtained by cutting the potatoes into
pieces like the sections of an orange and then cutting these sections
lengthwise into smaller pieces, like those shown at _b_, Fig. 17. Pieces
like those shown at _c_, called _shoestring potatoes_, are also popular.
As soon as cut, in no matter what shape, drop the pieces into cold
water, but when ready to fry, remove them from the water and dry on a
clean dry towel. Place in a wire basket and lower the basket into a pan
of hot fat. Fry until the potatoes are nicely browned, remove from the
fat, drain, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Serve at once.

84. POTATOES AU GRATIN.--Something a little unusual in the way of a
potato dish is produced when potatoes are combined with cheese, bread
crumbs, and a cream sauce to make potatoes au gratin. In addition to
supplying flavor, these ingredients increase the food value of the
potatoes so that a highly nutritious dish is the result.

POTATOES AU GRATIN
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 c. diced cooked potatoes
1/2 c. grated cheese
1/2 c. bread crumbs
1-1/2 c. thin white sauce

Grease a baking dish, place 1/2 of the potatoes in the bottom of the
dish, and sprinkle over them 1/2 of the crumbs and then 1/2 of the
cheese. Put the remainder of the potatoes in the dish, sprinkle with the
rest of the cheese, pour the hot white sauce over all, and place the
remaining crumbs on top. Set the dish in a hot oven and bake until well
heated through and brown on top.

85. LYONNAISE POTATOES.--When sautéd potatoes are flavored with onion
and parsley, they are known as Lyonnaise potatoes. As they are very
appetizing, potatoes prepared in this way are relished by most persons.

LYONNAISE POTATOES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter or ham or bacon fat
1/2 tsp. salt
1 medium-sized onion, chopped
Dash of pepper
2 Tb. parsley
3 c. diced cooked potatoes

Melt the fat in a frying pan, and add the onion, parsley, salt, and
pepper. When the fat is hot, add the potatoes, which should be diced,
like those shown at _d_, Fig. 17, and allow them to sauté until slightly
brown. Stir frequently to avoid burning. Serve hot.

86. SCALLOPED POTATOES.--Many vegetables may be scalloped, but potatoes
seem to lend themselves to this form of preparation to good advantage.
Potatoes prepared in this way are suitable for luncheon, supper, or a
home dinner.

Wash and peel the desired number of potatoes and slice them thin. Place
a layer in the bottom of a well-greased baking dish, sprinkle lightly
with flour, salt, and pepper, and dot with butter. Add another layer of
potatoes, sprinkle again with flour, salt, and pepper, and dot with
butter. Continue in this way until the dish is filled. Pour a sufficient
quantity of milk over the whole to cover well. Place a cover over the
dish, set in a hot oven, and bake for about 1/2 hour. Then remove the
cover and allow the potatoes to continue baking until they can be easily
pierced with a fork and the surface is slightly brown. Serve hot from
the baking dish.

87. CREAMED POTATOES.--A very good way in which to utilize left-over
boiled potatoes is to dice them and then serve them with a cream sauce.
If no cooked potatoes are on hand and creamed potatoes are desired,
potatoes may, of course, be boiled especially for this purpose. When
this is done, it is well to cook the potatoes in the skins, for they
remain intact better and have a better flavor.

Cut up potatoes that are to be creamed into half-inch dice, like those
shown at _d_, Fig. 17. Make a thin white sauce, pour it over the
potatoes until they are well moistened, and allow the potatoes to simmer
in this sauce for a few minutes. If desired, chopped parsley may be
added to the sauce to improve the flavor. Serve hot.

88. POTATO BALLS.--If a potato dish is desired for a meal that is to be
dainty in every respect, potato balls should be tried. These are small
balls of uniform size, like those shown at _e_, Fig. 17, cut from raw
potatoes by means of a French cutter, as shown in Fig. 18, cooked until
tender, and then dressed with a cream sauce or in any other way. As will
be observed, much of the potato remains after all the balls that can be
cut from it are obtained. This should not be wasted, but should be
boiled and then mashed or prepared in any other desirable way.

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

Wash and peel the potatoes that are to be used, and then from each
potato cut with a French cutter all the balls possible. When a
sufficient number have been obtained, boil them until tender in boiling
salted water and then drain. Make a thin cream sauce, add the potatoes
to this, and heat together thoroughly. Serve hot.

89. POTATO CROQUETTES.--Left-over mashed potatoes can be utilized in no
better way than to make croquettes. Of course, if potato croquettes are
desired and no potatoes are on hand, it will be necessary to cook
potatoes and mash them especially for this purpose. Croquettes made
according to the accompanying recipe will be found a delightful addition
to the menu. They are often served plain, but are much improved by a
medium white sauce or a gravy.

POTATO CROQUETTES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. mashed potatoes
2 Tb. chopped parsley
1 Tb. onion juice
1 tsp. celery salt
2 eggs
Dry bread crumbs

To the mashed potatoes, add the parsley, onion juice, and celery salt
and mix thoroughly. Beat the eggs slightly, reserve a small amount to be
diluted with water or milk for dipping the croquettes, and add the rest
to the potatoes. Shape the mixture into oblong croquettes of uniform
size and shape. Roll each in the crumbs, then in the diluted egg, and
again in the crumbs. Fry in deep hot fat until an even brown in color.
Remove from the fat, drain, and serve.  90. POTATO PUFF.--Mashed potato
combined with egg, seasoned well, and baked in the oven makes a very
appetizing dish known as potato puff. This is suitable for any meal at
which potatoes would be served.

POTATO PUFF
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. mashed potato
1/2 tsp. celery salt
1 egg

To the mashed potato, add the celery salt. Separate the egg, beat the
yolk, and mix it with the potato. Beat the white stiff and fold it into
the potato last. Pile into a buttered baking dish, set in a hot oven,
and bake until the potato is thoroughly heated through and the surface
is brown. Serve at once.


SWEET POTATOES

91. SWEET POTATOES are used for practically the same purposes as white
potatoes, and while these vegetables resemble each other in many
respects they are not related botanically, sweet potatoes being root
rather than tuber vegetables. Sweet potatoes are of a tropical nature
and have been cultivated for hundreds of years in the West Indies and
Central America. They form a staple article of diet in the southern part
of the United States, where, on account of the warm climate, they are
raised abundantly. They are not raised in the North; still they are
consumed there in large quantities. After maturing, sweet potatoes are
collected and dried in kilns before shipping. While this makes it
possible for them to keep longer than if they were not dried, they do
not keep so well as white potatoes and therefore cannot be stored in
such large numbers. If they are to be kept for a considerable period of
time, they should be wrapped separately in paper and stored in a cool,
dry place.

92. Sweet potatoes vary considerably in size, shape, and quality. Some
are short and blunt at the tips, others are long and cylindrical, either
crooked or straight, while others are medium in size and spindle-shaped.
Some varieties, which are known as _yams_, cook moist and sugary, while
others, which are simply called sweet potatoes, cook dry and mealy. The
kind to select depends entirely on the individual taste, for in
composition and food value all the varieties are similar. In
composition, sweet potatoes resemble white ones, except that a part of
their carbohydrate is in the form of sugar, which gives them their
characteristic sweet taste, but in food value they are almost twice as
great as white potatoes.

93. The preparation of sweet potatoes is similar to that of white
potatoes, for they may be boiled, steamed, baked, mashed, creamed,
fried, etc. In fact, they may be used at any time to take the place of
white potatoes in the diet. A few recipes are here given for this
vegetable, but any of those given under White Potatoes may also be used
by merely substituting sweet potatoes for the white potatoes specified.

94. BOILED SWEET POTATOES.--It is a very simple procedure to boil sweet
potatoes. When they are to be prepared in this way, select potatoes of
uniform size and either remove their skins or cook them with the skins
on. If they are not peeled, scrub them perfectly clean. Put them to cook
in boiling salted water and allow them to boil until they may be easily
pierced with a fork. Drain the water from them, peel if cooked with
their skins on, and serve hot with butter or gravy.

95. BAKED SWEET POTATOES.--Persons who are fond of sweet potatoes prefer
them baked to any other method of preparation. Select medium-sized
potatoes for this purpose, scrub thoroughly, and put in a hot oven to
bake. Bake until they are soft enough to dent when pinched between the
fingers. Remove from the oven and serve at once.

96. GLAZED SWEET POTATOES.--To increase the sweet taste characteristic
of sweet potatoes and favored by many persons, a sweet sirup is
sometimes added. When this is done, the potatoes are first boiled and
then cut in half lengthwise and sautéd. Sweet potatoes so prepared
afford a pleasing variety in the diet.

Clean and peel the desired number of potatoes and boil them as already
explained. Cut them in half lengthwise, so that each piece has a flat
side. Melt fat in a frying pan, add the halves of sweet potato, and fry
until slightly brown. Then turn and fry on the reverse side. About 10 or
15 minutes before removing from the pan, pour a small quantity of
molasses or a mixture of sugar and water over the potatoes, and allow
them to cook in this sirup until they are well covered with the sweet
substance. Remove from the pan and serve at once.  97. MASHED SWEET
POTATOES.--Used alone without further preparation, mashed sweet potatoes
make a very palatable dish. However, as in the case of mashed white
potatoes, numerous appetizing dishes, such as croquettes, patties, etc.,
can be made of mashed sweet potatoes, whether left from a previous meal
or cooked for this purpose. In the preparation of all such dishes, the
recipes given under White Potatoes may be followed.

Peel the desired number of potatoes and cook them in boiling salted
water until they may be readily pierced with a fork. Drain, force
through a sieve or a ricer, and season with salt, pepper, and a small
amount of butter. Thin the mixture with sufficient hot milk to make it
of a stiff, mush-like consistency. Then beat vigorously until the potato
is light and creamy. Serve hot.


RADISHES AND THEIR PREPARATION

98. RADISHES are a root vegetable used almost exclusively as a relish or
to lend flavor to a vegetable-salad mixture. They are easily and
successfully grown and are plentiful and cheap, except when they are out
of season and must be raised in hothouses. Numerous varieties of
radishes differing from one another in size, shape, and color are
raised. The red ones are generally preferred, because they lend color to
a dish or a meal, but the white and brown varieties are just as
desirable so far as flavor is concerned.

99. Radishes contain very little food value, being about equal to celery
and cucumbers in this respect. They do not supply anything valuable to a
meal except mineral salts. Although some persons consider radishes
difficult to digest, they contain almost nothing that has to be
digested, for they are composed largely of cellulose, which does not
digest, and water. Radishes disagree with some persons because, like
onions and cabbage, they contain a strong volatile oil that gives them
their flavor.

100. Since radishes are always eaten raw, they require very little in
the way of preparation. The principal thing is to see that they are
perfectly clean and as crisp as possible. To make them crisp, allow them
to stand in cold water for some time before using them. Then remove the
tops and the roots and scrub thoroughly with a vegetable brush. The
small red radishes can be made very attractive by cutting the skin in
sections to resemble the petals of a rose. When prepared in this way, a
small portion of the green top is allowed to remain.


SALSIFY AND ITS PREPARATION

101. SALSIFY is a root vegetable resembling in food value such other
root vegetables as carrots and parsnips. Because it has a flavor similar
to that of oysters, especially when it is used for soup, it has received
the name of _vegetable oyster_. It consists of long slender roots that
are covered with tiny roots. It is somewhat difficult to clean and
prepare, but as it may be stored through the entire winter and is
particularly desirable for the making of soup, it is a valuable
vegetable.

102. In preparing salsify for cooking, scrape the roots rather than peel
them. Then put them in a solution of cold salt water made by using 1
teaspoonful of salt to each quart of water and keep them there until
ready to cook them. This precaution will, to a certain extent, prevent
the discoloration that always takes place in salsify as soon as the skin
is removed. When thus prepared, salsify lends itself to the same forms
of preparation as do the other root vegetables.

103. BUTTERED SALSIFY.--The simplest way in which to cook salsify is to
cut it in thin slices, boil it until tender, and then serve it
with butter.

Wash and scrape the desired quantity of salsify and slice in thin
slices. Put to cook in boiling salted water, and cook until it can be
easily pierced with a fork. Drain off the water, season with pepper and,
if necessary, additional salt, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter for
each four persons to be served. Allow the butter to melt and serve the
salsify hot.

104. CREAMED VEGETABLE OYSTERS.--If creamed vegetables are favored,
vegetable oysters served with a cream sauce will be very much relished.
Clean and scrape the salsify and cut it into 1/4-inch slices. Put to
cook in boiling salted water, cook until tender, and then drain. Make a
medium white sauce and pour this over the cooked vegetable. Heat
together and serve.  105. SCALLOPED VEGETABLE OYSTERS.--A very
appetizing scalloped dish can be made of salsify by following the
directions given in the accompanying recipe.

SCALLOPED VEGETABLE OYSTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. cooked vegetable oysters
1 c. bread crumbs
Salt and pepper
1-1/2 c. thin white sauce

Cook the vegetable oysters as explained in Art. 103. Sprinkle a layer of
crumbs in the bottom of a well-greased baking dish, place a layer of the
cooked vegetable oysters on top of this, and season with salt and
pepper. Place a second layer of crumbs and the remainder of the
vegetable oysters in the dish, and sprinkle again with salt and pepper.
Pour the white sauce over this, and put the remainder of the crumbs on
top. Place in a hot oven and bake until well heated through and the top
is brown. Serve from the baking dish.


SQUASH AND ITS PREPARATION

SUMMER SQUASH

106. SUMMER SQUASH is a fruit vegetable belonging to the same class as
eggplant, peppers, etc. and occurring in many varieties. The different
kinds of this vegetable vary greatly in size, shape, and color, but all
of them may be prepared in practically the same way and used for the
same purposes. They get their name from the fact that they are grown and
used during the summer season; in fact, they must be used at this time,
for they do not permit of storage.

Summer squash contains a great deal of water, and for this reason its
food value is very low, being about equal to that of lettuce, celery,
etc. Because of the large percentage of water in its composition, as
little water as possible should be added in its cooking, or the result
will be a vegetable so watery as to be unattractive and unpalatable.
Another precaution that should be taken in its preparation is to remove
the seeds and the skins. Many housewives think it unnecessary to do
this, for both the skins and the seeds can be eaten after cooking; but
most persons prefer to have them removed, as the dish appears more
appetizing.  _Vegetable marrow_ is a type of summer squash and may be
prepared for the table by any of the recipes for summer squash.

107. STEWED SUMMER SQUASH.--The usual way in which to cook summer squash
is to stew it. If properly cooked and well seasoned, stewed squash makes
a very tasty dish.

Wash and peel the desired number of summer squashes, remove the seeds,
and cut into small pieces. Put over the flame in just enough water to
start the cooking and add sufficient salt to season well. Cook until
tender enough to be pierced with a fork and most of the water is boiled
away, being careful not to scorch. Remove from the fire, season with
pepper, and add 1 tablespoonful of butter for each four persons to be
served. Mash until the squash is as fine as desired and serve at once.

108. SAUTÉD SUMMER SQUASH.--For variety, summer squash is sometimes
sliced, coated with egg and crumbs, and then sautéd until well browned.

To prepare it in this way, wash and peel the squash and cut it into
slices about 1/4 inch thick. Roll first in beaten egg diluted with milk
or water and then in fine crumbs. Sauté in a small amount of fat in a
frying pan until well browned, and then turn and brown on the other
side. Serve hot.


WINTER SQUASH

109. WINTER SQUASH is the kind of squash that may be removed from the
vine in the fall and stored for winter use. Although both summer and
winter squashes are closely related, they differ considerably in
appearance, flavor, texture, and composition. The different varieties of
winter squash are usually larger than summer squashes and have a very
hard outside covering; also, they contain less water and more
carbohydrate and, consequently, have a higher food value. Winter
squashes are usually taken from the vines in the fall before the frost
sets in, and before they are placed in storage they are allowed to lie
in the sunshine for a few days until the skin hardens and becomes
flinty. If the outside covering is unmarred when the squashes are
stored, they will remain in good condition almost the entire winter
season, provided the storage place is cool and dry.

110. To prepare winter squash for cooking, cut it open, remove the
seeds, and peel off the outside skin. Because of the hardness of the
covering, a cleaver or a hatchet is generally required to open the
squash and cut it into pieces. With this done, scrape out the seeds and,
with a very sharp large knife, peel off the skin. The squash may then be
cooked in any suitable manner.

111. MASHED SQUASH.--If winter squash is desired as a vegetable, it is
very often boiled and then mashed. Squash prepared in this way, with the
exception of the seasoning, is also used for pie that is similar to
pumpkin; in fact, many persons prefer the flavor of squash pie to that
of pumpkin pie.

Cut pieces of peeled winter squash into cubes about 1 inch in size. Put
these to cook in a small amount of boiling water, add enough salt to
season, and cook until tender and quite dry. Season the cooked squash
with pepper, add 1 tablespoonful of butter for each four persons to be
served, and, if desired to increase the sweet taste, add a small amount
of sugar. Mash until smooth and serve hot.

112. BAKED SQUASH.--Winter squash, because of its hard covering, is very
satisfactory when baked in the shell, as shown in Fig. 19. If it is not
desired to cook it in a whole piece, the squash may be cut into pieces
about 3 inches square or into triangular pieces.

[Illustration: FIG. 19]

Remove the seeds from the squash, sprinkle each with salt and pepper,
and dot with butter, as shown. Place in a hot oven directly on the grate
or in a shallow pan, and bake until the contents of the shells are
tender. Remove from the oven, and serve from the shells. If desired, the
squash may be scooped from the shells after baking, seasoned at that
time instead of when put in the oven, and then served in a
vegetable dish.

 TOMATOES AND THEIR PREPARATION

113. TOMATOES are a fruit vegetable that may be either cooked or
prepared raw in many different ways. They are usually red when ripe, and
because of this color they are particularly attractive on the table.
Green or partly ripe tomatoes are also used in the preparation of many
dishes. Tomatoes are composed largely of water, and for this reason
their food value is low, being about the same as that of greens. This
large proportion of water is also responsible for the fact that they do
not keep for a great length of time. Tomatoes, however, have a long
season. They begin to appear in the market early in the spring and they
may be obtained from this time until the frost kills the vines in
the fall.

114. While tomatoes appeal to the majority of persons, they disagree
with some on account of the acid they contain. This acid is similar to
that found in some fruits, and it is present in greater quantity in
cooked tomatoes than in raw ones, the heating of the vegetable
apparently increasing the acidity. This acidity of tomatoes may be
reduced by the addition of soda, and while soda produces a marked change
in the flavor, it is necessary in the preparation of some dishes. For
instance, in the case of cream-of-tomato soup, soda must be added to
reduce the acidity and thus keep the milk or cream used in preparing
this dish from curdling.

115. The skin of tomatoes, whether they are to be eaten raw or cooked,
is usually undesirable. Therefore, in preparing tomatoes for the table,
the skins are generally removed. In order to do this, first dip the
tomatoes into boiling water for several seconds and then immediately
into cold water. This will loosen the skins, which may then be peeled
off very thinly, and very little of the tomato will be wasted.

116. STEWED TOMATOES.--The usual way of preparing tomatoes is to stew
them. Stewed tomatoes may be served plain, but they can be improved very
decidedly by toasting cubes of bread and adding these to the tomatoes
just before serving.

Remove the skins and stem ends from the desired number of tomatoes, and
either cut the tomatoes into pieces or allow them to remain whole. Put
to cook with little or no water, as the tomatoes themselves usually
provide sufficient water. Season with salt, and cook until the tomatoes
are reduced to a mushy consistency. Just before removing from the stove,
add a dash of pepper and a small amount of butter.

117. SCALLOPED TOMATOES.--A very appetizing way in which to cook
tomatoes is to scallop them according to the accompanying recipe.

SCALLOPED TOMATOES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. crumbs, buttered
2 c. stewed tomatoes
1 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper
1 Tb. butter

Grease a baking dish and place a layer of the crumbs in the bottom.
Place a layer of tomatoes over them, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
dot with the butter. Add another layer of crumbs and the remainder of
the tomatoes, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and again dot with butter.
Place the remainder of the crumbs on top. Bake in a hot oven until well
heated through and the crumbs on top are brown. Serve hot from the
baking dish.

118. STUFFED TOMATOES.--Tomatoes prove to be very satisfactory when
stuffed with a well-seasoned stuffing and then baked. Medium-sized
tomatoes that are firm and unblemished should be selected for stuffing.

STUFFED TOMATOES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 tomatoes
1-1/2 c. crumbs
2 Tb. butter
1 small onion, chopped
1 tsp. celery salt
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of pepper

Remove the stem end from each tomato and scoop out the inside so that a
hollow shell remains. Chop the pulp of the tomatoes into small pieces
and add the crumbs, melted butter, onion, celery salt, salt, and pepper.
Mix together thoroughly. If the tomatoes do not furnish enough liquid to
moisten the crumbs, add a little water. Pack the stuffing into the
tomatoes, allowing it to heap up on top, and place the tomatoes side by
side in a shallow pan. Set in a hot oven and bake until the tomato
shells are tender enough to be pierced with a fork and the stuffing is
well heated through. Serve at once.

[Illustration: FIG. 20]

119. STUFFED TOMATOES WITH CHEESE CARROTS.--An attractive way in which
to serve stuffed tomatoes is shown in Fig. 20.  The tomatoes are filled
with a tasty stuffing and then baked. Yellow cream cheese is made to
resemble tiny carrots, and these, together with parsley, are used to
garnish the platter in which the tomatoes are placed.

STUFFED TOMATOES WITH CHEESE CARROTS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

6 medium-sized tomatoes
4 Tb. bacon or ham fat
2 Tb. chopped onion
1/2 c. chopped ham
1-1/2 c. stale bread crumbs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. chopped parsley
Yellow cream cheese
Parsley

Cut the tops from the tomatoes and remove the pulp. Melt the fat in a
frying pan, add the chopped onion, ham, tomato pulp, bread crumbs, salt,
pepper, and parsley. Heat thoroughly and mix well. Fill the tomatoes
with the stuffing, which should be quite moist, put them in a shallow
pan, and bake them until the tomato shell may be easily pierced with a
fork. Mash yellow cream cheese and, if necessary, moisten it slightly
with cream. Shape it into tiny carrots with the fingers, and put a piece
of parsley in one end for leaves. Place the baked tomatoes on a platter
and garnish with the carrots and sprigs of parsley. Serve.

120. SAUTÉD TOMATOES.--Half ripened tomatoes are delicious when sautéd.
Cut the desired number of such tomatoes into slices about 1/4 inch
thick, and roll first in beaten egg and then in stale bread crumbs or
cracker crumbs. Sauté in a small amount of fat until they are brown on
one side; then turn and brown on the other side. Remove from the pan and
serve at once.

121. CREAMED TOMATOES.--A rather unusual, but nevertheless very
appetizing, way of preparing tomatoes consists in sautéing them in fat
and then serving them with a cream sauce on freshly toasted bread.

When it is desired to prepare tomatoes in this manner, select
medium-sized ones and cut them into slices 1/2 inch thick. Roll the
slices first in egg and then in stale bread crumbs or cracker crumbs.
Sauté in a generous amount of fat until brown, drain carefully, and
brown on the other side. When done, remove from the pan. Add 2
tablespoonfuls of flour to the fat that remains in the pan, and stir
until the flour becomes light brown. Add 1-1/2 cupfuls of milk and stir
until thick. Place the slices of tomato on freshly toasted bread and
pour the sauce over them.


TURNIPS AND THEIR PREPARATION

122. TURNIPS, which are a root vegetable, occur in two varieties,
_white_ and _yellow_. The white ones are commonly known as _turnips_ and
the yellow ones are called _rutabagas_. Although differing in color,
both varieties have much the same flavor and may be prepared in the same
ways. Therefore, whenever a recipe calls for turnips, rutabagas may be
used as well.

123. In food value, turnips are similar to beets, carrots, and parsnips.
They have a strong flavor, which is disliked by many persons and
disagrees with some. However, much of this can be dissipated by cooking
them with the cover of the kettle removed, so that when properly
prepared they furnish a pleasant variety to the winter menu. They have
good storing qualities and can be kept very easily through the winter.
Toward spring it is more difficult to cook them soft, as the cellulose
in them becomes harder and they are likely to develop woody fiber.

124. In preparing turnips for cooking, scrub them until thoroughly clean
and then peel, wasting no more of the vegetable than is necessary. They
may then be cut up as desired for the recipe to be prepared.

125. STEWED TURNIPS.--When turnips are stewed until tender and then
seasoned with salt and pepper and flavored with butter they form a very
palatable dish.

To prepare them in this way, select the desired number, scrub them
until clean, and then peel them. Cut them into dice about 1/2 inch in
size, and put these to cook in boiling salted water, allowing the cover
to remain off the kettle during the cooking. Cook until they may be
easily pierced with a fork and drain the water from them. Season with
additional salt, if necessary, and with pepper, and add 1 tablespoonful
of butter for each four persons to be served. Allow the butter to melt
and serve hot.

126. MASHED TURNIPS.--Turnips, like potatoes, are a very good vegetable
to mash. Prepare the desired number in the manner explained in Art. 125.
Cook in boiling salted water with the kettle cover removed. When tender
enough to be mashed easily, drain the water from them, mash with a
potato masher, and season with additional salt if necessary and with
pepper and butter. Allow the butter to melt and serve hot.

127. CREAMED TURNIPS.--Turnips, both yellow and white, make an excellent
dish when dressed with a cream sauce. Prepare the desired number of
turnips by cleaning and peeling them and cutting them into dice about
1/2 inch in size. Cook until tender in boiling salted water and drain.
Prepare a medium white sauce and pour over the turnips. Serve hot.


VEGETABLE COMBINATIONS

128. The recipes given for the various kinds of vegetables pertain in
most cases to merely one vegetable, and this is the way in which this
food is usually prepared. However, there are times when it is an
advantage to combine two or more vegetables. For instance, it is
sometimes desired to give additional variety to the menu or to utilize
small quantities of vegetable that alone would not be sufficient to
serve the family. Then, again, two vegetables are often prepared
together in order to obtain an attractive color combination. In view of
these facts, several recipes for the most usual combinations of
vegetables are here given, so that the housewife may not be at a loss
when she wishes to combine two or more vegetables. It must not be
thought that these are the only combinations that can be prepared, for
often vegetables can be combined to suit the housewife's taste
and needs.

129. CARROTS AND PEAS.--If an attractive combination, as well as an
appetizing dish, is desired, carrots and peas should be prepared
together and served with butter or a vegetable or a cream sauce. This
combination may be served plain, but if there are any mashed potatoes on
hand and an attractive dish is desired, it may be served in potato
rosettes, as shown in Fig. 21.

Clean and scrape the desired number of young, tender carrots, and cut
them into dice about the size of the peas that are to be used. Shell an
equal quantity of green peas. Put the two vegetables together in boiling
salted water and cook until tender. If there is any possibility that the
carrots will not cook in as short a period of time as the peas, cook
them for some time before adding the peas. When tender, pour off the
water, add additional salt, if necessary, and pepper, and dress with
butter or, if preferred, with a vegetable or a white sauce. Heat through
thoroughly and serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 21]

If it is desired to serve the carrots and peas in the rosettes
mentioned, force hot mashed potato through a pastry tube and form the
required number of rosettes on a platter, as shown. In the center of
each rosette put a spoonful or two of the carrots and peas.

In case fresh peas cannot be secured, canned peas may be substituted.
When this is done, the carrots should be cooked until tender and the
peas added just before the sauce is poured over the vegetables.

130. SUCCOTASH.--A combination of fresh shelled beans and sweet corn is
known as succotash. To prepare this dish, shell the beans and put them
to cook in boiling salted water. Cook until they are tender and the
water has boiled down until it is greatly reduced in quantity. Then cut
an equal amount of corn from the cob and add to the beans. Cook for a
few minutes longer or until the water is sufficiently reduced, so that
the combination may be served without pouring any water off. Dress with
butter and season with pepper and, if necessary, additional salt.

During the winter, when green corn and fresh beans cannot be secured,
succotash can be made by using dried or canned corn and dried beans.

131. CORN AND TOMATOES.--A somewhat unusual vegetable combination is
made by cooking tomatoes and green corn together.

Prepare the desired number of tomatoes in the usual way for stewing and
cut an equal amount of sweet corn from the cob. Put the two vegetables
together in a saucepan and cook until the tomatoes are well stewed.
Season with salt, pepper, and sugar, if desired, and add a small piece
of butter. Serve hot.

132. CORN, STRING BEANS, AND TOMATOES.--Those who care for the
combination of corn and tomatoes will find beans a very agreeable
addition to this dish.

Prepare the corn and tomatoes as explained in Art. 131, and to them add
young, tender string beans that have been previously cooked in boiling
salted water. Add the desired seasoning and a small amount of butter.
When thoroughly heated, serve.

133. PEAS AND POTATOES.--As a rule, the first green peas and the first
new potatoes come into the market at about the same time. If a delicious
combination is desired, these two vegetables should be cooked together
and then dressed in any desirable way.

Select small potatoes, scrape them, and put them to cook in boiling
salted water. Shell an equal amount of green peas, and add them to the
potatoes about 20 minutes before the potatoes become tender. Cook until
both vegetables are tender, and then drain the water from them. Dress
with butter, vegetable sauce, cream sauce, or thin cream and serve.

134. TURNIPS AND POTATOES.--Persons who are likely to find the flavor of
turnips disagreeable can usually eat them when they are combined
with potatoes.

Pare an equal number of Irish potatoes and turnips and cut them into
thick slices. Put them to cook in boiling salted water and cook with the
cover off the kettle until both are tender. Drain and dress with butter
or add butter and mash together. Serve hot.

135. NEW ENGLAND BOILED DINNER.--A combination of food that is much
used by the people of the New England States and has become famous
throughout the United States, consists of corned beef, potatoes,
turnips, and cabbage. As may well be imagined, such a combination forms
practically all that is necessary for a home dinner.

Select a good piece of corned beef and put it to cook in boiling water.
About 30 minutes before the beef has finished cooking, add additional
water, if necessary, and into this place an equal quantity of Irish
potatoes, turnips, and cabbage prepared in the required way and cut into
thick slices or chunks. Cook until the vegetables are tender. Then
remove the beef to a platter, surround with vegetables, and serve.


SERVING VEGETABLES

136. The way in which vegetables are served depends largely on the
method of preparation. However, a point that should never be neglected,
so far as cooked vegetables are concerned, no matter what plan of
serving is followed, is to see that they are always served hot. To make
this possible, the dishes in which they are served should be heated
before the vegetables are put into them and should be kept hot until put
on the table. When a vegetable dish has a cover, the cover should be
kept on until the vegetable is served and should be replaced after the
first serving, so as to keep the remainder hot.

137. Because of the possible variety in the preparation of this class of
foods, numerous ways of serving them are in practice. When a vegetable
is baked in a large baking dish, the dish should be placed on the table
and the vegetable served from it either on the plate or in individual
dishes. If individual baking dishes are used, these should be set on
small plates and one put at each person's place. Boiled or creamed
vegetables may be served at the table from a vegetable dish, being put
on the plate or in small dishes, or they may be served in individual
dishes in the kitchen, and a dish placed at the left of each person's
place. When the large dish or the baking dish is placed on the table, it
should be placed where the vegetable may be conveniently served by the
host if it is to be put on the dinner plate or by the hostess in case it
is to be served in individual dishes at the table.

138. In addition to being served in these ways, vegetables also lend
themselves to various attractive methods of serving. For instance, a
vegetable prepared with a sauce is frequently served in patty shells,
timbale cases, or croustades. When this is done, the case in which the
vegetable is served is, as a rule, placed directly on the dinner plate.
Potatoes that have been mashed are often forced through a pastry tube
either to garnish another dish or to make a dish of potatoes more
attractive. For instance, when mashed potatoes are to be served, a solid
foundation of the potato may be arranged in the center of a dish and a
little of the mashed potato then forced through the tube to make a
design over the top. Before being served, the dish should be placed in
the oven and the potato browned on top. A little thought on the part of
the housewife will enable her to work out many other attractive methods
in the serving of this food.

 VEGETABLES (PART 2)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) How do wild and cultivated greens differ? (_b_) What is the
chief use of greens in the diet?

(2) (_a_) What precaution should be observed in washing greens? (_b_)
Mention the procedure in cooking greens having a strong flavor.

(3) (_a_) If greens, such as endive, appear to be withered, how may they
be freshened? (_b_) Explain the use of lettuce as a garnish. (_c_) What
are the uses of parsley?

(4) (_a_) How are Jerusalem artichokes prepared for the table? (_b_)
What part of kohlrabi is used for food? (_c_) How is kohlrabi generally
prepared for cooking?

(5) (_a_) To what class of vegetables do lentils belong? (_b_) Is the
food value of lentils low or high? Discuss.

(6) (_a_) How may the food value of mushrooms be increased? (_b_) How
should mushrooms be prepared for cooking? (_c_) Mention the ways in
which mushrooms may be cooked.

(7) (_a_) What causes onions, especially raw ones, to disagree with many
persons? (_b_) Mention the two general varieties of onions. (_c_) How
are chives prepared when they are to be used for flavoring soups, etc.?

(8) (_a_) How should onion be added to other foods when it is desired
simply as a flavoring? (_b_) How may onions be peeled so as to keep off
the fumes of their volatile oil?

(9) (_a_) How should parsnips be prepared for cooking? (_b_) Tell how to
prepare browned parsnips.

(10) In what way do green and dried peas differ in food value? Explain
fully.

(11) Tell how to cook: (_a_) green peas; (_b_) dried peas.

(12) (_a_) What varieties of peppers are generally used as a vegetable?
(_b_) Of what value are peppers?

(13) (_a_) To what may the high food value of potatoes be attributed?
(_b_) How may the quality of potatoes be judged? (_c_) Mention the most
economical way in which to cook potatoes.  (14) Tell how to prepare:
(_a_) mashed potatoes; (_b_) baked potatoes. (_c_) How may the baking of
potatoes be hastened? (_d_) Mention several ways in which to utilize
left-over potatoes.

(15) (_a_) How may sweet potatoes be prepared for the table? (_b_) Tell
how to prepare glazed sweet potatoes.

(16) (_a_) How are radishes usually eaten? (_b_) What may be said of the
food value of radishes?

(17) (_a_) In what way do summer and winter squashes differ? (_b_) Why
should the seeds and skins of summer squash be removed in preparing this
vegetable for the table?

(18) (_a_) Why is salsify called vegetable oyster? (_b_) How is salsify
prepared for cooking?

(19) (_a_) What may be said of the food value of tomatoes? (_b_) How may
the acidity of tomatoes be decreased? (_c_) How may the skins of
tomatoes be removed easily?

(20) (_a_) Point out the difference between turnips and rutabagas. (_b_)
When is it advisable to make combination vegetable dishes? (_c_) Mention
several good combinations.

       *       *       *       *       *


 INDEX

A

Acid, Butyric,
  Lactic,
Adulteration of milk,
Albumin in milk,
  Vegetable,
Alpine eggs,
American Cheddar cheese,
  cream cheese,
  home-made cheese,
Apples, Baked,
Artichokes, Buttered,
  Composition and food value of French,
  Creamed,
  French,
  Jerusalem,
  with Hollandaise sauce,
Artificial buttermilk,
Ash, or mineral matter, in vegetables,
Asparagus,
  and its preparation,
  Composition and food value of,
  for cooking, Preparation of,
  Scalloped,
  with butter dressing,

B

Baked apples,
  beans,
  beets,
  eggplant,
  eggs in cream,
  onions,
  potatoes,
  sauerkraut,
  squash,
  sweet potatoes,
Baking dishes for egg recipes, Individual,
Balls, Potato,
Bean croquettes,
  loaf, Lima,
  purée,
  soufflé,
Beans and their preparation,
  Baked,
  Composition and food value of dried,
  Composition and food value of lima,
  Composition and food value of shell,
  Composition and food value of string,
  Shell,
  String,
  Varieties of,
  Wax,
Beating of eggs,
Beet tops,
Beets and their preparation,
  Baked,
  Buttered,
  Composition and food value of,
  Pickled,
  Preparation and cooking of,
  Selection and care of,
  with cream dressing,
  with sour dressing,
Belgian cheese,
Black-butter sauce,
  tea,
Boiled cabbage,
  dinner, New England,
  kohlrabi,
  onions,
  potatoes,
  sweet potatoes,
Bonbons, Cheese,
Breakfast menu,
Breaking of eggs,
Brick cheese,
Brie cheese,
Broiled mushrooms,
Browned carrots,
  parsnips,
  potatoes,
Brussels sprouts and their preparation,
  sprouts, Buttered,
  sprouts, Composition and food value of,
  sprouts, Cooking of,
  sprouts, Creamed,
  sprouts, Scalloped,
Bulb, root, and tuber vegetables,
Butter,
  Care of,
  Cooking with,
  dressing, Asparagus with,
  Economical use of,
  Flavor and composition of,
  Purchasing,
  Renovated,
  Serving,
  substitutes,
  substitutes, Method of testing,
Buttered artichokes,
  beets,
  Brussels sprouts,
  carrots,
  salsify,
Butterine,
Buttermilk,
  Artificial,
  Composition and food value of,
  cream cheese,
Butyric acid,

C

Cabbage,
  and its preparation,
  Boiled,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Preparation and cooking of,
  Purple,
  Savoy,
  Scalloped,
  Selection and care of,
  Turnip,
  White,
Camembert cheese,
Candling eggs,
Caps, Sanitary milk,
Caramel junket,
Carbohydrate in milk,
Carbohydrates in vegetables,
Care and selection of string beans,
  of butter,
  of celery,
  of cheese,
  of milk,
  of milk in the home, Necessity for,
  of potatoes,
  of vegetables,
Carrots,
  and peas,
  and their preparation,
  Browned,
  Buttered,
  Composition and food value of,
  Selection and preparation of,
  with parsley,
Casein in milk,
Cauliflower,
  and its preparation,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Scalloped,
  Selection and cooking of,
  with tomato sauce,
Celery,
  au gratin,
  Care of,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Preparation of,
Cellulose in vegetables,
Certified milk,
Characteristics and care of cheese,
  of wholesome milk,
Cheddar cheese,
  cheese, American,
Cheese,
  American Cheddar,
  American cream,
  American home-made,
  -and-macaroni loaf,
  Belgian,
  bonbons,
  Brick,
  Brie,
  Buttermilk,
  Buttermilk cream,
  Camembert,
  Care of,
  Characteristics of,
  Cheddar,
  Cheshire,
  Composition of,
  Cottage,
  dishes, Recipes for,
  dishes, Variety of,
  Domestic,
  dreams,
  Edam,
  Effect of cooking on,
  Emmenthal,
  English,
  English dairy,
  fondue,
  Foreign,
  Gorgonzola,
  Gruyère,
  Holland,
  Imported,
  Junket cottage,
  Limburger, or limburg,
  Neufchâtel,
  omelet,
  Origin, use, and production of,
  Parmesan,
  Quality of,
  Roquefort,
  sandwiches,
  Sapsago,
  sauce,
  Serving,
  soufflé,
  Stilton,
  straws,
  stuffing, Tomatoes with,
  Swiss,
  Switzer,
  toast,
  Varieties of,
  wafers,
Cheeses, French,
  Italian,
  Swiss,
Cheshire cheese,
Chestnuts, Creamed mushrooms and,
Chives,
Chocolate junket,
Clabber, or curd,
Classification of vegetables,
Clean milk, Grades of,
Cleanliness of milk,
Clipped eggs,
Combinations, Vegetable,
Commercial preservation of eggs,
Composition and flavor of butter,
  and food value of asparagus,
  and food value of beets,
  and food value of Brussels sprouts,
  and food value of buttermilk,
  and food value of cabbage,
  and food value of carrots,
  and food value of cauliflower,
  and food value of celery,
  and food value of corn,
  and food value of cream,
  and food value of cucumbers,
  and food value of dandelion greens,
  and food value of dried beans,
  and food value of dried lentils,
  and food value of dried peas,
  and food value of eggplant,
  and food value of endive,
  and food value of French artichokes,
  and food value of green peas,
  and food value of greens,
  and food value of Jerusalem artichokes,
  and food value of kohlrabi,
  and food value of lettuce,
  and food value of lima beans,
  and food value of mushrooms,
  and food value of okra,
  and food value of onions,
  and food value of parsnips,
  and food value of peppers,
  and food value of potatoes,
  and food value of radishes,
  and food value of salsify,
  and food value of shell beans,
  and food value of skimmed milk,
  and food value of spinach,
  and food value of string beans,
  and food value of summer squash,
  and food value of sweet potatoes,
  and food value of Swiss chard,
  and food value of tomatoes,
  and food value of turnips,
  and food value of vegetables, Table showing,
  and food value of watercress,
  and food value of whey,
  and food value of winter squash,
  of cheese,
  of milk,
  of whole milk,
  Standard of milk,
  structure, and food value of vegetables,
Condensed milk,
Cooked sautéd potatoes,
Cooking eggs,
  milk,
  of Brussels sprouts,
  of cauliflower,
  of dried shell beans,
  of eggs,
  of lentils,
  of vegetables, General methods of preparation and,
  on cheese, Effect of,
  on vegetables, Effect of,
  Preparing mushrooms for,
  Preparing vegetables for,
  Variety of ways to use milk in,
  with butter,
Corn and its preparation,
  and tomatoes,
  Composition and food value of,
  cooked in milk,
  fritters,
  on the cob,
Corn oysters,
  pulp,
  soufflé,
  string beans, and tomatoes,
  Sweet,
Cottage cheese,
  -cheese, Junket,
Cow's milk,
Cream,
  cheese, American,
  Composition and food value of,
  -of-corn soup,
  Standard grading of milk and,
  Whipping,
Creamed artichokes,
  asparagus on toast,
  Brussels sprouts,
  cabbage,
  cauliflower,
  celery,
  eggs,
  kohlrabi,
  mushrooms and chestnuts,
  onions,
  parsnips,
  peas,
  potatoes,
  spinach,
  string beans,
  tomatoes,
  turnips,
  vegetable oysters,
Cress, Upland,
Croquettes, Bean,
  Potato,
Cucumbers and their preparation,
  Composition and food value of,
  Stuffed,
Curd, or clabber,

D

Dairy cheese, English,
Dandelion,
  greens, Composition and food value of,
  with sour sauce,
Desiccated eggs,
Deterioration of eggs, Causes and prevention of,
Diet, Milk in the,
Digestibility of eggs,
  of vegetables,
Dinner, New England boiled,
Domestic cheese,
Drawn-butter sauce,
Dreams, Cheese,
Dressing, Sour,
  Sour-cream,
Dried beans, Composition and food value of,
Dried lentils, Composition and food value of,
  onions,
  peas,
  peas, Composition and food value of,
  shell beans, Cooking of,

E

Edam cheese,
Egg beater. Rotary, or Dover,
  recipes,
  recipes, Individual baking dishes for,
  soufflé,
Eggplant,
  Baked,
  Food value and composition of,
  Preparation of,
  Sautéd,
  Scalloped,
Eggs,
  à la goldenrod,
  Alpine,
  and place in the diet, Description of,
  as food, Value of,
  Beating of,
  Breaking of,
  Candling,
  Clipped,
  Commercial preservation of,
  Cooking,
  Cooking of,
  Creamed,
  Desiccated,
  Deterioration of,
  Digestibility of,
  Extra fancy,
  Fancy,
  Fat in,
  for cooking, Preliminary preparation of,
  Fried,
  Hard-cooked,
  Home preservation of,
  in cream, Baked,
  in the home, Judging the quality of,
  in the market, Judging the quality of,
  Left-over,
  Marketing of,
  Minerals in,
  Nutritive value of,
  on toast, Poached,
  on toast, Scrambled,
  Poached,
  Points to observe in cooking,
  Powdered,
Eggs, Preservation of,
  Protein in,
  Quality of,
  Scalloped,
  Scrambled,
  Selection of,
  Separating of,
  Serving of,
  Soft-cooked, or jellied,
  Strictly fresh,
  Stuffed,
  with ham, Scrambled,
  with ham, Shirred,
  with limewater, Preservation of,
  with tomato, Scrambled,
  with water glass, Preservation of,
Emmenthal cheese,
Emulsion,
Endive,
  Composition and food value of,
English cheese,
  dairy cheese,
  monkey,
Evaporated and condensed milk,
  milk,
Extra fancy eggs,

F

Fancy eggs,
Fat in eggs,
  in milk,
  in vegetables,
Figs stuffed with cheese,
Flavor and composition of butter,
Flavoring, Onions for,
Flower and fruit vegetables,
Fondue, Cheese,
Food, Importance of vegetables as,
  value and composition of asparagus,
  value and composition of beets,
  value and composition of Brussels sprouts,
  value and composition of buttermilk,
  value and composition of cabbage,
  value and composition of carrots,
  value and composition of cauliflower,
  value and composition of celery,
  value and composition of corn,
  value and composition of cream,
  value and composition of cucumbers,
  value and composition of dandelion greens,
  value and composition of dried beans,
  value and composition of dried lentils,
  value and composition of dried peas,
  value and composition of eggplant,
  value and composition of endive,
  value and composition of French artichokes,
  value and composition of green peas,
  value and composition of greens,
  value and composition of Jerusalem artichokes,
  value and composition of kohlrabi,
  value and composition of lettuce,
  value and composition of lima beans,
  value and composition of mushrooms,
  value and composition of okra,
  value and composition of onions,
  value and composition of parsnips,
  value and composition of peppers,
  value and composition of potatoes,
  value and composition of radishes,
  value and composition of salsify,
  value and composition of shell beans,
  value and composition of spinach,
  value and composition of string beans,
  value and composition of summer squash,
  value and composition of sweet potatoes,
  value and composition of Swiss chard,
  value and composition of tomatoes,
  value and composition of turnips,
  value and composition of vegetables, Table showing,
  value and composition of watercress,
  value and composition of whey,
  value and composition of winter squash,
  value and varieties of greens,
  value of potatoes,
  value of vegetables, Structure, composition and,
  value of whole milk,
  values of milk products, Comparison of,
Foods containing milk,
Foreign cheese,
French artichokes,
  artichokes, Preparation of,
  cheese,
  fried potatoes,
Fresh shell beans, Preparation and cooking of,
Freshness of milk,
Fried eggs,
Fritters, Corn,
Fruit and flower vegetables,
  Junket with,

G

Garlic,
Glazed sweet potatoes,
Gorgonzola cheese,
Grades of clean milk,
Green onions,
  peas,
  peas, English style,
  peas with butter,
Greens and their preparation,
 Food value of,
 General directions for cooking,
 Varieties of,
Gruyère cheese,
Gumbo,

H

Hard-cooked eggs,
Hash-browned potatoes,
Holland cheese,
Hollandaise sauce,
  sauce, Artichokes with,
Home, Keeping milk clean in the,
  Keeping milk cool in the,
  -made cheese, American,
  Milk in the,
  preservation of eggs,
Hot slaw,

I

Imported cheese,
Individual baking dishes for egg recipes,
Irish potatoes,
Italian cheeses,

J

Jellied, or soft-cooked, eggs,
Jerusalem artichokes,
  artichokes, Composition and food value of,
  artichokes, Preparation of,
Judging the quality of eggs in the home,
  the quality of eggs in the market,
Junket
  Caramel,
  Chocolate,
  cottage cheese,
  Plain,
  Recipes for,
  with fruit,

K

Kinds of cheese,
Kohlrabi,
  Boiled,
  Composition and food value,
  Creamed,
  Mashed,
  Preparation of,

L

Lactic acid,
Lactose,
Leeks,
Left-over eggs,
Legumes,
Legumin,
Lentil puff,
Lentils,
  Cooking of,
  Preparation of,
Lettuce,
  Composition and food value of,
Lima-bean loaf,
  beans, Composition and food value of,
  beans en casserole,
  beans in cream,
Limburg cheese,
Limburger cheese,
Lime in milk,
Limewater, Preservation of eggs with,
Loaf, Cheese-and macaroni,
  Lima Bean,
Luncheon menu,
Lyonnaise potatoes,

M

Maître d'hôtel sauce,
Margarine,
Marketing of eggs,
Marrow, Vegetable,
Mashed kohlrabi,
  parsnips,
  potatoes,
  squash,
  sweet potatoes,
  turnips,
Medium white sauce,
  white sauce for vegetables,
Menu, Breakfast,
  Luncheon,
Methods of cooking applied to vegetables,
Milk,
  Adulteration of,
  Albumin in,
  and cream, Standard grading of,
  caps, Sanitary,
  Carbohydrate in,
  Care of,
  Casein in,
  Certified,
Milk, Characteristics of wholesome,
  Cleanliness of,
  Composition and food value of skim,
  Composition of,
  Composition of whole,
  composition, Standard of,
  Condensed,
  Cooking,
  Cow's,
  dishes and sauces, Recipes for,
  Evaporated,
  Fat in,
  Foods containing,
  Freshness of,
  Grades of clean,
  in cooking, Ways of using,
  in the diet,
  in the home,
  in the home, Necessity for care of,
  Mineral matter in,
  Modified,
  Pasteurized,
  Points to be observed in cooking,
  Powdered,
  Preserved,
  products, Comparison of food value of,
  Products obtained from,
  Protein in,
  Purchase of,
  Skim,
  Sour,
  Sterilized,
  Water in,
  Whole,
Mineral matter in milk,
  matter, or ash, in vegetables,
Minerals in eggs,
Modified milk,
Monkey, English,
Mushrooms,
  and chestnuts, Creamed,
  and their preparation,
  Broiled,
  Composition and food value of,
  for cooking, Preparing,
  Sautéd,
  Stewed,

N

Navy beans, Stewed,
Neufchâtel cheese,
New England boiled dinner,
Nutritive value of eggs,

O

Okra,
  Composition and food value of,
  Preparation of,
  Stewed,
  with tomatoes,
Oleomargarine,
Omelet, Cheese,
  Plain,
  Puff,
  Tomato,
Omelets, Variety in,
Onion family, Varieties of the,
Onions,
  Baked,
  Boiled,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Dried,
  for flavoring,
  for the table,
  Green,
  Preparation of,
  Stuffed,
Oyster, Vegetable,
Oysters, Corn,
  Creamed vegetable,
  Scalloped vegetable,

P

Parmesan cheese,
Parsley,
Parsnips,
  Browned,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Mashed,
  Preparation of,
Pasteurized milk,
Patties, Potato,
Peas,
  and carrots,
  and potatoes,
  and their preparation,
  Composition and food value of dried,
  Creamed,
  Dried,
  Food value and composition of green,
  Green,
  in turnip cups,
  purée,
  soufflé,
Peppercress,
Peppers,
  Composition and food value of,
  Preparation of,
  Stuffed,
Perishable vegetables,
Phosphates,
Pickled beets,
Plain junket,
  omelet,
Poached eggs,
  eggs on toast,
Potash,
Potato balls,
  croquettes,
  patties,
  puff,
Potatoes,
  and peas,
  and turnips,
  au gratin,
  Baked,
  Baked sweet,
  Boiled,
  Boiled sweet,
  Browned,
  Care of,
  Composition and food value of,
  Composition and food value of sweet,
  Cooked sautéd,
  Creamed,
  French fried,
  Glazed sweet,
  Hash-browned,
  Lyonnaise,
  Mashed,
  Mashed sweet,
  Preparation of,
  Raw sautéd,
  Scalloped,
  Selection of,
  Stuffed,
  Sweet,
  White,
Powdered eggs,
  milk,
Preparation and cooking of beets,
  and cooking of cabbage,
  and cooking of fresh shell beans,
  and cooking of string beans,
  and cooking of vegetables, General methods of,
  of asparagus for cooking,
  of beans,
  of beets,
  of Brussels sprouts,
  of cabbage,
  of carrots,
  of cauliflower,
  of celery,
  of corn,
  of cucumbers,
  of eggplant,
  of eggs for cooking, Preliminary,
  of French artichokes,
  of greens,
  of kohlrabi,
  of Jerusalem artichokes,
Preparation of lentils,
  of mushrooms,
  of mushrooms for cooking,
  of okra,
  of onions,
  of parsnips,
  of peas,
  of peppers,
  of potatoes,
  of radishes,
  of salsify,
  of squash,
  of tomatoes,
  of turnips,
Preparing vegetables for cooking,
Preservation of eggs,
  of eggs with limewater,
  of eggs with water glass,
Preserved milk,
Production, origin, and use of cheese,
Products, Comparison of food value of milk,
  obtained from milk,
Protein in eggs,
  in milk,
  in vegetables,
Puff, Lentil,
  omelet,
  Potato,
Pulp, Corn,
Purchase of milk,
  of vegetables,
Purchasing butter,
Purée, Bean,
  Peas,
Purple cabbage,

Q

Quality of cheese,
  of eggs,
  of eggs in the home, Judging the,
  of eggs in the market, Judging the,

R

Radishes,
  Food value and composition of,
  Preparation of,
Rarebit, Welsh,
Raw sautéd potatoes,
Recipes, Egg,
  for cheese dishes,
  for junket,
  for milk dishes and sauces,
  for white sauce,
Renovated butter,
Root, tuber, and bulb vegetables,
Roquefort cheese,
Rotary, or Dover, egg beater,
Rutabagas,

S

Salsify,
  Buttered,
  Composition and food value of,
  Preparation of,
Sapsago cheese,
Sandwiches, Cheese,
Sanitary milk caps,
Sauce, Black-butter,
  Cheese,
  Drawn-butter,
  for creamed string beans,
  for vegetables, Medium white,
  Hollandaise,
  Maître d'hôtel,
  Medium white,
  Recipes for white,
  Thick white,
  Thin white,
  Tomato,
  Vegetable,
Sauces and milk dishes, Recipes for,
  for vegetables,
Sauerkraut, Baked,
  Making,
  Sautéd,
  with spareribs,
Sautéd eggplant,
  mushrooms,
  sauerkraut,
  summer squash,
  tomatoes,
Savoy cabbage,
Scalloped asparagus,
  Brussels sprouts,
  cabbage,
  cauliflower,
  eggplant,
  eggs,
  potatoes,
  tomatoes,
  vegetable oysters,
Scrambled eggs,
  eggs on toast,
  eggs with ham,
  eggs with tomato,
Selection and care of beets,
  and care of cabbage,
  and care of string beans,
  and cooking of cauliflower,
  and preparation of carrots,
  of eggs,
  of potatoes,
Separating of eggs,
Serving butter,
  cheese,
  of eggs,
  vegetables,
Shallots,
Shell beans,
Shell beans dressed with butter,
  beans in cream,
  beans, Preparation and cooking of fresh,
  beans, Varieties and food value of,
Shirred eggs with ham,
Skim milk,
  Milk, Composition and food value of,
Slaw,  Hot,
Soft-cooked, or jellied, eggs,
Soufflé, Bean,
  Cheese,
  Corn,
  Egg,
  Peas,
  Spinach,
Soup, Cream-of-corn,
Sour-cream dressing,
  dressing,
  milk,
Spinach,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Royal,
  Soufflé,
Squash and its preparation,
  Baked,
  Composition and food value of summer,
  Composition and food value of winter,
  Mashed,
  Sautéd summer,
  Stewed summer,
  Summer,
  Winter,
Standard grading of milk and cream,
  of milk composition,
Sterilized milk,
Stewed mushrooms,
  navy beans,
  okra,
  summer squash,
  tomatoes,
  turnips,
Stilton cheese,
Straws, Cheese,
Strictly fresh eggs
String beans,
  beans, corn, and tomatoes,
  beans, Creamed,
  beans in butter beans,
  Preparation and cooking of,
  beans, Selection and care of,
  beans, Varieties of,
  beans with salt pork,
  beans with sour dressing,
Structure, composition, and food value of vegetables,
Stuffed cucumbers,
  eggs,
  onions,
  peppers,
  potatoes,
  tomatoes,
  tomatoes with cheese carrots,
Substitutes, Butter,
  Method of testing butter,
Succotash,
Succulent vegetables,
Summer squash,
  squash, Sautéd,
  squash, Stewed,
Sweet corn,
  potatoes,
  potatoes, Baked,
  potatoes, Boiled,
  potatoes, Glazed,
  potatoes, Mashed,
Swiss chard, Composition and food value of,
  cheeses,
Switzer cheese,

T

Table showing composition and food value of vegetables,
Tea, Black,
Testing butter substitutes, Method of,
Thick white sauce,
Thin white sauce,
Toast, Cheese,
Tomato omelet,
  sauce,
Tomatoes,
  and corn,
  Composition and food value of,
  corn, and string beans,
  Creamed,
  Preparation of,
  Sautéd,
  Scalloped,
  Stewed,
  Stuffed,
  with cheese carrots, Stuffed,
  with cheese stuffing,
Tuber, root, and bulb vegetables,
Turnip cabbage,
Turnips,
  and potatoes,
  Composition and food value of,
  Creamed,
  Mashed,
  Preparation of,
  Stewed,

U

Upland cress,
Use of butter, Economical,
Use, origin, and production of cheese,


V

Value of eggs as food,
Varieties and food value of greens,
  and food value of shell beans,
  of beans,
  of cheese, Classification of,
  of greens,
  of string beans,
  of the onion family,
  of vegetables,
Variety in omelets,
  in vegetables,
  of cheese dishes,
  of ways to use milk in cooking,
Vegetable albumin,
  combinations,
  marrow,
  oyster,
  oysters, Creamed,
  oysters, Scalloped,
  sauce,
Vegetables,
  as food, Importance of,
  as food, Preparation of,
  Carbohydrates in,
  Care of,
  Cellulose in,
  Classification of,
  Composition of,
  Digestibility of,
  Effect of cooking on,
  Fat in,
  Food value of,
  for cooking, Preparing,
  Fruit and flower,
  Medium white sauce for,
  Methods of cooking applied to,
  Mineral matter, or ash, in,
  Perishable,
  Preparation of,
  Protein in,
  Purchase of,
  Root, tuber, and bulb,
  Sauces for,
  Serving,
  Structure of,
  Succulent,
  Varieties of,
  Variety in,
  Water in,
  Winter,


W

Wafers, Cheese,
Water glass, Preservation of eggs with,
  in milk,
Water  in vegetables
Watercress
  Composition and food value of
Wax beans
Welsh rarebit
Whey
  Composition and food value of
Whipping cream
White cabbage
  potatoes
White sauce for vegetables, Medium
  sauce, Medium
  sauce, Recipes for
  sauce, Thick
  sauce, Thin
Whole milk
  milk, Food value of
Wholesome  milk, Characteristics of
Winter squash
  vegetables













*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMAN'S INSTITUTE LIBRARY OF COOKERY. VOLUME 2: MILK, BUTTER AND CHEESE; EGGS; VEGETABLES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




# Tolminc Cheese: A Tale of Alpine Tradition

In the heart of Slovenia's northwestern reaches, where the Julian Alps cast their imposing shadows over verdant valleys, a cheese of remarkable character has been born and nurtured through the centuries. Tolminc, as it's called, is more than just a dairy product; it's a living legacy, a testament to the enduring spirit of the Slovenian people and their deep connection to the land that sustains them.

Named for the town of Tolmin, nestled in the picturesque Soča Valley, Tolminc cheese embodies the very essence of its Alpine home. Its story is one of resilience, innovation, and a steadfast commitment to tradition, mirroring the journey of the pastoral communities that have called this rugged landscape home for millennia.

To truly appreciate Tolminc cheese is to embark on a journey through time, to peel back the layers of history and uncover the rich tapestry of cultural, economic, and environmental factors that have shaped its development. From its humble beginnings as a means of preserving precious milk to its current status as a protected culinary treasure, Tolminc cheese has been a silent witness to the ebb and flow of empires, the hardships of war, and the triumphs of human ingenuity.

As we delve into the world of Tolminc cheese, we'll explore not just its physical characteristics - the firm texture, the complex flavor profile that speaks of Alpine meadows and age-old techniques - but also its role in shaping the identity of a region and its people. We'll uncover the secrets of its production, handed down through generations of skilled artisans, and examine how these traditional methods have adapted to the demands of the modern world without losing their essential character.

The story of Tolminc cheese begins in the mists of prehistory, when the first pastoral communities began to make their mark on the Alpine landscape. Archaeological evidence paints a picture of early Bronze Age settlements, dating back to around 2000 BCE, where the foundations of dairy farming were already being laid. Ceramic sieves and other artifacts speak to a people already versed in the art of transforming milk into more stable, storable forms - the precursors to the cheeses we know today.

Yet it was during the Middle Ages that Tolminc cheese truly began to take shape. As permanent settlements grew in the Soča Valley, so too did the need to efficiently use and preserve the bounty of the land. Monastic orders, those great preservers of knowledge throughout Europe's tumultuous Dark Ages, likely played a crucial role in refining and standardizing cheesemaking techniques in the region.

The Patriarchate of Aquileia, a powerful ecclesiastical state that held sway over the area from the 11th to the 14th centuries, left an indelible mark on local agricultural practices. Under their influence, and that of the monastic orders they supported, the distinctive characteristics of Tolminc cheese began to emerge. The unique combination of local milk production techniques, the specific microbial environment of the Alpine region, and the accumulated wisdom of generations of cheesemakers all contributed to the development of a cheese perfectly adapted to its environment.

As the centuries rolled on, Tolminc cheese witnessed the rise and fall of empires. The Venetian Republic and later the Habsburg Monarchy each left their mark on the region, bringing new influences and challenges. The Venetians, with their extensive trade networks, may have been responsible for introducing Tolminc cheese to a wider audience, while the Habsburgs' agricultural reforms likely led to an increase in the scale of cheese production in the Tolmin area.

It was in the 19th century that Tolminc cheese first stepped out of the shadows of oral tradition and into the light of written record. An agricultural report from 1756, unearthed from the archives of Tolmin, provides one of the earliest known references to the cheese by name. This document not only confirms the existence of a distinct local cheese but suggests that it had already established a reputation worthy of official note.

The 20th century brought unprecedented challenges to the traditional ways of life in the Alpine regions. Two World Wars ravaged the landscape and disrupted centuries-old practices. The post-war period, with its drive towards industrialization and standardization, threatened to relegate traditional cheesemaking to the annals of history. Yet, like the hardy Alpine flora that cling to life in the harshest of conditions, Tolminc cheese endured.

The latter part of the 20th century saw a renaissance of interest in traditional foods and artisanal production methods. As Slovenia moved towards independence and eventually joined the European Union, there was a growing recognition of the importance of preserving cultural heritage. Tolminc cheese, with its centuries of history and deep connection to the land, became a symbol of this movement.

In 2012, Tolminc cheese achieved a milestone that would have been unimaginable to those early Bronze Age settlers: it was granted Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) status by the European Union. This prestigious recognition not only affirmed the cheese's unique character and its inextricable link to the Tolmin region but also provided legal protection for its name and production methods.

As we venture further into the 21st century, Tolminc cheese stands as a bridge between past and present, a living embodiment of Slovenia's rich culinary heritage. It faces new challenges - changing consumer tastes, environmental concerns, the pressures of a globalized market - but it does so with the resilience that has seen it through millennia of change.

In the pages that follow, we'll delve deeper into the world of Tolminc cheese. We'll explore the intricacies of its production, uncover its role in local culture and cuisine, and examine its place in the broader context of European cheesemaking traditions. Through this journey, we'll come to understand that Tolminc cheese is more than just a food - it's a cultural artifact, a economic driver, and a testament to the enduring bond between a people and their land.

As we venture further into the 21st century, Tolminc cheese stands as a bridge between past and present, a living embodiment of Slovenia's rich culinary heritage. It faces new challenges - changing consumer tastes, environmental concerns, the pressures of a globalized market - but it does so with the resilience that has seen it through millennia of change.



The Cradle of Tolminc: A Landscape of Legends
To truly understand Tolminc cheese, one must first understand the land from which it springs. The Soča Valley, with the town of Tolmin at its heart, is a realm of breathtaking beauty and stark contrasts. Here, the Julian Alps rise in majestic peaks, their snow-capped summits standing sentinel over lush, green valleys below. The Soča River, with its startling turquoise waters, carves its way through the landscape, a liquid lifeline that has shaped both the terrain and the lives of those who call this region home.
It is in this dramatic setting that Tolminc cheese was born and continues to thrive. The unique geography of the area plays a crucial role in defining the character of the cheese. The Alpine and sub-Alpine meadows, rich in diverse flora, provide grazing grounds for the cattle whose milk forms the foundation of Tolminc. These high-altitude pastures, known locally as "planine," are more than just feeding grounds; they are the stages upon which the age-old drama of seasonal transhumance - the movement of livestock between summer and winter pastures - continues to play out.
The soil here, a complex mix of limestone and flysch, imparts its own subtle influence on the grasses and herbs that grow in abundance during the short, intense Alpine summers. This, in turn, affects the composition of the milk produced by the grazing cattle, contributing to the distinctive flavor profile of Tolminc cheese. It's a testament to the concept of terroir - the idea that a food product can encapsulate the essence of its place of origin - applied not to wine, as is most common, but to cheese.
The climate of the region, characterized by cold winters and mild summers with adequate rainfall, creates ideal conditions for both cattle rearing and cheese production. The natural caves and cellars carved into the limestone landscape provide perfect environments for the aging process, their consistent cool temperatures and humidity levels allowing the cheese to develop its complex flavors over months or even years.
But the geography of Tolminc is not just about physical features. It's also about the human geography - the patterns of settlement, the agricultural practices, and the cultural traditions that have developed in harmony with the natural environment over centuries. The town of Tolmin itself, nestled at the confluence of the Soča and Tolminka rivers, has long been a center of trade and cultural exchange, its strategic location making it a natural hub for the surrounding Alpine communities.
A Cheese Comes of Age: The Journey to PDO Status
In the modern era, as global trade and industrialized food production threatened to overshadow traditional products like Tolminc cheese, a new chapter in its story began to unfold. This chapter was about recognition, protection, and a renewed appreciation for the unique qualities that come from a deep connection to place and tradition.
The journey towards Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) status for Tolminc cheese was a testament to the dedication of local producers and their commitment to preserving their heritage. The process began in earnest in the early 2000s, as Slovenia prepared for and then joined the European Union. It was a time of both opportunity and challenge, as traditional products faced increased competition but also gained access to new markets and forms of protection.
The application for PDO status required a meticulous documentation of Tolminc cheese's history, production methods, and unique characteristics. Local cheese makers, agricultural experts, and historians came together to compile evidence of Tolminc's long-standing reputation and its inextricable link to the Tolmin region. They delved into archives, collected oral histories, and conducted detailed analyses of the cheese's physical and chemical properties.
One of the key elements in the PDO application was defining the precise geographical area where Tolminc cheese could be produced. This area, encompassing the municipalities of Tolmin, Kobarid, and Bovec, along with parts of the Bohinj area, represents the historical heart of Tolminc production. It's a region united not just by administrative boundaries, but by shared agricultural traditions and a common Alpine heritage.
The production regulations for Tolminc cheese, as outlined in the PDO specification, read like a distillation of centuries of traditional knowledge. They stipulate that the cheese must be made from the raw milk of cows grazing on the specified Alpine and sub-Alpine pastures. The cattle must be primarily of the autochthonous Bovec and Cika breeds, or crosses thereof, ensuring a continuation of the region's livestock heritage. The cheese making process itself is precisely defined, from the temperature at which the milk must be heated to the minimum aging period of 60 days.
These strict regulations serve multiple purposes. They ensure the consistent quality and character of Tolminc cheese, protecting both producers and consumers. They also act as a safeguard for traditional production methods, preventing the erosion of cultural heritage in the face of modernization and industrialization.
After years of preparation and scrutiny, Tolminc cheese was finally awarded PDO status by the European Union in 2012. This recognition was more than just a bureaucratic designation; it was an affirmation of the cheese's unique place in European gastronomic culture and a powerful tool for its future preservation and promotion.
The PDO status has had a profound impact on the production and perception of Tolminc cheese. For producers, it has provided legal protection against imitation products and a valuable marketing tool, allowing them to command premium prices for their artisanal cheese. For consumers, the PDO label serves as a guarantee of authenticity and quality, a assurance that the Tolminc cheese they're enjoying is a true taste of Slovenian Alpine tradition.
Moreover, the PDO status has helped to reinvigorate the local economy and preserve traditional ways of life in the Tolmin region. Young people, who might otherwise have been tempted to abandon their rural heritage for urban opportunities, have found new reasons to stay and continue their families' cheesemaking traditions. The increased visibility brought by PDO status has also boosted tourism in the region, with food enthusiasts from around the world making pilgrimages to taste Tolminc cheese in its place of origin.
As we look to the future, the PDO status of Tolminc cheese stands as a bulwark against the homogenizing forces of globalization. It ensures that this unique product, born from the marriage of a specific place and centuries of human skill and tradition, will continue to be a living link to Slovenia's pastoral heritage. In every wheel of Tolminc cheese, carefully crafted and patiently aged, one can taste not just milk, cultures, and salt, but the very essence of the Slovenian Alps - a flavor that has been centuries in the making and will, thanks to PDO protection, continue to delight discerning palates for generations to come.



The Alchemy of the Alps: Crafting Tolminc Cheese
In the quiet predawn hours, as mist still clings to the Alpine meadows and the first rays of sunlight begin to paint the peaks of the Julian Alps, the age-old process of creating Tolminc cheese begins anew. This daily ritual, repeated countless times over centuries, is more than just a method of food production; it's a sacred tradition, a connection to the land and to generations past.
The journey of Tolminc cheese begins, as it always has, with the milk. But not just any milk will do. The PDO specifications demand that Tolminc be made from the raw milk of cows grazing on the Alpine and sub-Alpine pastures of the region. These are primarily cows of the autochthonous Bovec and Cika breeds, or crosses thereof - hardy animals well-adapted to the rigors of mountain life.
During the summer months, from June to September, many of these cows participate in the ancient practice of transhumance. They are led up to the high mountain pastures, or "planine," where they graze on a diverse array of Alpine herbs and grasses. This diet, rich in aromatic plants like thyme, gentian, and various Alpine flowers, imparts unique flavors and aromas to the milk - subtle notes that will later emerge in the finished cheese.
The milking process itself is a blend of tradition and modernity. While some smaller producers still milk by hand, maintaining an intimate connection with their animals, many now use modern milking machines. Regardless of the method, the focus is always on cleanliness and speed, ensuring the milk retains its freshness and purity.
Once collected, the milk is quickly transported to the cheese-making facility. Time is of the essence here; the PDO regulations stipulate that the milk must be processed within two milkings, or a maximum of 24 hours. This ensures the milk's optimal freshness and maintains its complex microbiological balance, crucial for the development of Tolminc's distinctive character.
In the cheese-making room, large copper vats stand ready, their surfaces gleaming in the early morning light. Copper is the material of choice for these vats, not just out of tradition, but because of its excellent heat conductivity and its subtle influence on the flavor development of the cheese.
The milk is gently heated to a temperature of around 32-34°C (90-93°F), the perfect warmth for the next crucial step: the addition of rennet. Traditionally, this rennet would have been extracted from the stomachs of young ruminants, but today, many producers use vegetarian alternatives. The rennet causes the milk to coagulate, transforming from a liquid into a soft, custard-like mass.
As the milk sets, the cheese maker watches carefully, years of experience guiding their judgment. When the curd has reached just the right consistency - firm enough to hold its shape but still yielding to gentle pressure - it's time for cutting. Using traditional tools, some of which have been passed down through generations, the curd is cut into small, grain-sized pieces.
This cutting process is crucial, determining much about the final texture and moisture content of the cheese. The smaller the curd is cut, the more whey is expelled, resulting in a harder, drier cheese. For Tolminc, the goal is a firm, compact texture that can stand up to long aging, so the curds are cut quite small.
After cutting, the curds are gently stirred and heated again, this time to around 46-48°C (115-118°F). This second heating, known as "cooking" the curds, further encourages whey expulsion and sets the stage for the characteristic texture of Tolminc cheese.
Once the curds have reached the desired consistency, they are removed from the whey and transferred to molds. These molds, traditionally made of wood but now often of food-grade plastic for ease of cleaning, give Tolminc its characteristic wheel shape. The cheese is pressed, either by hand or with mechanical presses, to remove any remaining whey and ensure a compact texture.
The young wheels of Tolminc are then immersed in brine, a solution of salt and water. This salting process not only enhances the flavor of the cheese but also plays a crucial role in its preservation, inhibiting the growth of unwanted bacteria and helping to form the rind.
After brining, the real magic begins: the aging process. The wheels of Tolminc are transferred to aging rooms, often natural caves or cellars carved into the limestone landscape of the region. These environments, with their consistent cool temperatures and high humidity, provide ideal conditions for the slow maturation of the cheese.
Here, in the quiet dark of the aging rooms, Tolminc undergoes its final transformation. Over a minimum of 60 days - though often much longer for more mature versions - a complex dance of biochemical processes unfolds. Enzymes break down proteins and fats, creating the complex flavors and aromas that characterize fully-ripened Tolminc. The rind develops, hardening and darkening to a warm golden-brown.
During this aging period, the cheese is regularly turned and brushed, ensuring even maturation and preventing the growth of unwanted molds. This is a labor-intensive process, requiring constant attention and care. Each wheel is checked individually, with experienced cheese makers using all their senses - sight, smell, touch, and even sound - to gauge the progress of the aging cheese.
As the weeks and months pass, Tolminc develops its full character. The paste of the cheese, initially elastic and pale, becomes firmer and takes on a warm, straw-yellow color. Small, evenly distributed eyes may form throughout the cheese, a sign of proper fermentation. The flavors deepen and intensify, developing the complex profile that Tolminc is known for - notes of butter and fresh milk give way to more pronounced, nutty flavors, with hints of the Alpine herbs on which the cows grazed.
After a minimum of 60 days - though many producers age their Tolminc for much longer, sometimes up to 24 months for extra-mature versions - the cheese is ready. Each wheel, weighing between 3.5 and 5 kilograms, represents not just a food product, but a piece of Alpine history, a testament to the skill of the cheese maker, and a tangible link to the landscape from which it came.
The production of Tolminc cheese is a process that honors tradition while embracing necessary modernizations. It's a delicate balance, maintaining the essential character of the cheese while ensuring it meets modern standards of safety and consistency. Every step, from the grazing of the cows to the final aging of the cheese, is guided by generations of accumulated knowledge and a deep respect for the unique terroir of the Tolmin region.
In each wheel of Tolminc, one can taste the sun-drenched Alpine meadows, the pure mountain air, and the skilled hands of the cheese makers. It's a flavor that speaks of place and tradition, a true embodiment of Slovenia's rich culinary heritage. And as long as there are skilled artisans willing to wake before dawn, as long as cows graze on the high mountain pastures, this ancient tradition will continue, producing wheels of Tolminc that are not just food, but a cultural treasure.



A Symphony of Senses: The Characteristics of Tolminc Cheese
To truly appreciate Tolminc cheese is to embark on a sensory journey, one that engages not just the taste buds, but all the senses. Each wheel of Tolminc is a microcosm of the Slovenian Alps, capturing within its paste and rind the essence of sun-drenched meadows, crisp mountain air, and centuries of cheesemaking tradition.
As we approach a wheel of fully matured Tolminc, the first thing that strikes us is its appearance. The cheese presents itself as a proud, cylindrical wheel, typically measuring between 23 and 28 centimeters in diameter and standing 8 to 10 centimeters tall. Its weight, a substantial 3.5 to 5 kilograms, speaks to its dense, compact nature.
The rind of Tolminc is a story in itself, a visual record of the cheese's journey through the aging process. In young Tolminc, barely past its minimum 60-day maturation, the rind appears smooth and pale, with just a hint of the golden hue it will develop. As the cheese ages, this color deepens into a rich, warm brown, sometimes taking on amber or even reddish tones. The surface may become slightly rough or uneven, bearing the marks of the cloth it was aged on and the many turns it received during maturation.
Cutting into a wheel of Tolminc is a moment of anticipation for any cheese lover. The knife meets with firm resistance, a testament to the cheese's dense texture. As the wheel is split, it may produce a satisfying crackling sound, particularly in well-aged specimens where protein crystals have formed throughout the paste.
The interior of Tolminc reveals a paste that ranges from pale straw to deep golden yellow, depending on the season of production and length of aging. This color is a direct reflection of the cows' diet; cheese made from summer milk, when the animals graze on lush Alpine pastures rich in beta-carotene, tends to have a deeper yellow hue.
The texture of the paste is firm and compact, yet not crumbly. In younger Tolminc, it retains a certain elasticity, while more mature versions become progressively harder and more granular. Throughout the paste, one might observe small, evenly distributed eyes or holes, typically no larger than a pea. These are a sign of proper fermentation and add character to the cheese's appearance.
As we bring a piece of Tolminc closer for examination, its aroma begins to assert itself. The bouquet of a well-matured Tolminc is complex and inviting, a prelude to the flavors that await. The initial scent is often described as sweet and milky, reminiscent of fresh cream or butter. This base note is overlaid with more complex aromas that speak to the cheese's Alpine origin.
Subtle hints of herbs and wildflowers may be detected, echoes of the diverse flora of the high mountain pastures where the cows grazed. There's often a nutty quality to the aroma, particularly in more aged versions, reminiscent of hazelnuts or almonds. Some tasters report detecting notes of hay or even a slight smokiness, though Tolminc is not a smoked cheese. These deeper, more savory notes are a product of the long aging process and the breakdown of proteins and fats within the cheese.
But it's in the tasting that Tolminc truly reveals its character. As a piece of the cheese begins to melt on the tongue, it releases a symphony of flavors. The initial taste is often described as sweet and creamy, a reflection of the high-quality milk used in its production. This sweetness is quickly balanced by a gentle acidity, a crucial component that prevents the cheese from becoming cloying and adds to its complexity.
As the tasting progresses, more nuanced flavors begin to emerge. There's often a distinct nuttiness, which becomes more pronounced in older cheeses. Some tasters report detecting fruity notes, particularly in younger Tolminc, which can be reminiscent of apples or pears. The herbal quality hinted at in the aroma often comes through in the taste as well, a subtle grassiness that speaks to the cheese's Alpine origins.
In well-aged Tolminc, umami notes begin to develop, adding depth and savoriness to the flavor profile. These can manifest as hints of beef broth or roasted meat, a common development in long-aged hard cheeses. Alongside this, one might detect a slight piquancy or sharpness, particularly near the rind, where the aging process is most pronounced.
The finish of Tolminc is long and satisfying. The flavors linger on the palate, evolving subtly over time. There's often a slightly salty note at the end, a reminder of the brining process the cheese underwent. This salinity, however, is never overwhelming, serving instead to enhance and amplify the other flavors.
Texturally, Tolminc offers a pleasing contrast between its firm, almost crunchy exterior and the smoother, meltable interior. As it's chewed, it breaks down into creamy, luxurious mouthfeel, coating the palate and releasing its flavors slowly.
One of the most remarkable characteristics of Tolminc is how it changes over its aging period. A young Tolminc, at just two months old, is milder and more elastic, with pronounced milky flavors and subtle herbal notes. As it ages, it becomes progressively harder and more crumbly, with its flavor profile deepening and intensifying. A Tolminc aged for 12 months or more can develop an almost Parmesan-like quality, with a granular texture and intense, complex flavors.
The nutritional profile of Tolminc is also worth noting. As a hard cheese made from whole milk, it's rich in protein and calcium, as well as other essential nutrients. The long aging process increases its digestibility, breaking down proteins and making them more accessible to the body. The use of raw milk in its production may also contribute beneficial bacteria and enzymes, though this aspect is still a subject of ongoing research.
In the end, what makes Tolminc truly special is how it encapsulates its terroir - the unique environmental factors of the Tolmin region - in its characteristics. The floral notes speak of Alpine meadows, the rich, creamy flavors reflect the quality of the milk, and the complex development of its taste over time is a testament to the skill of the cheese makers and the perfect aging conditions provided by the region's natural caves.
Each wheel of Tolminc is slightly different, influenced by factors such as the specific pasture the cows grazed on, the season of production, and the length of aging. Yet, through the strict PDO regulations and the dedication of its producers, Tolminc maintains a consistent core identity. It is always recognizably itself - a cheese that speaks eloquently of its Alpine home and the centuries of tradition behind its creation.
To taste Tolminc is to experience a piece of Slovenian cultural heritage, a flavor that has been centuries in the making. Whether enjoyed on its own, paired with local wines, or used in traditional dishes, Tolminc offers a sensory journey to the heart of the Julian Alps, a taste of history and tradition that continues to captivate cheese lovers around the world.



A Taste of Tradition: The Cultural Significance and Culinary Uses of Tolminc Cheese
In the rolling hills and towering mountains of the Soča Valley, Tolminc cheese is far more than just a food product. It is a cultural touchstone, a link to the past, and a source of pride for the local community. The story of Tolminc is interwoven with the story of the Slovenian people themselves, reflecting centuries of tradition, hardship, and resilience.
To understand the cultural significance of Tolminc, one must first understand the central role of dairy farming in the Alpine regions of Slovenia. For centuries, the harsh mountain environment necessitated a lifestyle centered around livestock, particularly cattle. The seasonal movement of herds to high mountain pastures, known as transhumance, shaped not just the economic life of the region but its social and cultural life as well.
In this context, cheese-making emerged not just as a means of preserving milk, but as a vital economic activity and a cornerstone of local cuisine. Tolminc, with its long shelf life and rich nutritional profile, became a staple food for the mountain communities, providing sustenance through long winters when fresh food was scarce.
The production of Tolminc also played a crucial role in the social fabric of the community. Cheese-making was often a communal activity, bringing together families and neighbors. The skills involved were passed down from generation to generation, creating a living link to ancestral knowledge and practices.
Today, even as modern life has transformed many aspects of Alpine culture, Tolminc remains a powerful symbol of regional identity. The cheese is featured prominently in local festivals and events, such as the annual Cheese Festival in Tolmin, where producers showcase their craft and compete for honors. These events not only celebrate the cheese itself but also serve to strengthen community bonds and pass on traditional knowledge to younger generations.
The cultural importance of Tolminc is also reflected in local folklore and art. Tales of cheese-making often feature in regional stories and songs, speaking to its central place in the collective imagination. Local artists frequently depict scenes of Alpine pastures, grazing cattle, and cheese production in their works, further cementing Tolminc's place in the cultural landscape.
In recent years, as interest in traditional and artisanal foods has grown, Tolminc has taken on a new significance as a symbol of Slovenia's gastronomic heritage. Its PDO status has helped to raise its profile both nationally and internationally, making it a point of pride for Slovenia as a whole. For many Slovenians, Tolminc represents not just a delicious cheese, but a tangible connection to their country's pastoral roots and a testament to the enduring value of traditional craftsmanship.
But Tolminc is not merely an object of cultural significance; it is also a versatile and beloved ingredient in the kitchen. Its rich flavor and firm texture make it a favorite among chefs and home cooks alike, used in a variety of traditional and modern dishes.
In its simplest form, Tolminc is often enjoyed as part of a cheese board, where its complex flavors can be fully appreciated. It pairs beautifully with local wines, particularly the robust reds of the nearby Goriška Brda region. The nutty, slightly sweet flavor of Tolminc also makes it an excellent companion to fresh fruits, especially pears and apples, which are abundant in the region.
One of the most traditional ways to enjoy Tolminc is as part of a "planinski zajtrk" or mountain breakfast. This hearty meal, originally designed to fuel shepherds for a day of work in the high pastures, typically includes thick slices of Tolminc alongside cured meats, fresh bread, and perhaps some locally produced honey. It's a simple yet satisfying combination that speaks to the no-nonsense, nourishing cuisine of the mountain regions.
In cooked dishes, Tolminc truly shines. Its ability to melt smoothly without becoming greasy makes it an excellent choice for gratins and baked dishes. A popular local recipe is "krompirjeva musaka s Tolmincem" (potato moussaka with Tolminc), where layers of sliced potatoes are interspersed with ground meat and generous amounts of grated Tolminc, then baked until golden and bubbling.
Tolminc is also a key ingredient in "frtalja," a type of herb omelet traditional to the Soča Valley. In this dish, eggs are mixed with a variety of wild herbs gathered from the mountainsides - things like wild chives, dandelion leaves, and nettles - and then cooked with generous shavings of Tolminc cheese. The result is a dish that encapsulates the flavors of the Alpine meadows in every bite.
Pasta dishes, too, benefit from the addition of Tolminc. Grated over a plate of "bleki" (a type of square pasta typical to the region) tossed with seasonal vegetables, Tolminc adds a depth of flavor and a pleasant textural contrast. In the colder months, it might be stirred into a hearty barley soup, where it melts slightly, enriching the broth and adding a subtle tangy note.
More aged versions of Tolminc, with their intensified flavors and granular texture, are often used in a manner similar to Parmesan. They're grated over risottos, used to finish soups, or even incorporated into the dough for savory biscuits or cheese straws.
In recent years, as Slovenian cuisine has gained international recognition, innovative chefs have begun to use Tolminc in new and creative ways. It might be found infused into a creamy polenta, layered into a reimagined Karst prosciutto sandwich, or even incorporated into desserts. One particularly innovative use sees Tolminc paired with dark chocolate in a surprising but delightful truffle, the cheese's nutty notes complementing the bitterness of the chocolate.
Beyond the kitchen, Tolminc plays a role in the broader food culture of Slovenia. It's a common sight at farmers' markets and specialty food shops, where knowledgeable vendors are often happy to share the story of the cheese along with a sample. Food tourism centered around Tolminc has also grown, with visitors to the Soča Valley often including cheese farm visits and tastings in their itineraries.
The versatility of Tolminc in culinary applications mirrors its versatility in Slovenian culture. It is at once a humble staple food and a gourmet delicacy, a link to the past and a part of contemporary cuisine. Whether melted over a rustic dish in a mountain hut or carefully plated in a high-end Ljubljana restaurant, Tolminc carries with it the flavors and stories of its Alpine home.
In every grate, slice, or crumble of Tolminc, one tastes not just a cheese, but a piece of Slovenian history and culture. It embodies the connection between land and people, between tradition and innovation. As long as the cattle graze on the high Alpine meadows and skilled hands transform their milk into wheels of Tolminc, this cheese will continue to play its vital role in the cultural and culinary landscape of Slovenia, a delicious bridge between past and present.



﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dairying exemplified, or, The business of cheese-making
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dairying exemplified, or, The business of cheese-making

Author: J. Twamley

Release date: February 1, 2023 [eBook #69922]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: J. Sharp, 1787

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Krista Zaleski and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAIRYING EXEMPLIFIED, OR, THE BUSINESS OF CHEESE-MAKING ***






Dairying Exemplified.




  Dairying Exemplified,

  OR

  The ~B U S I N E S S~ of

  CHEESE-MAKING:

  Laid down from approved Rules, collected
  from the most experienced Dairy-Women,
  of several ~C O U N T I E S~.

  Digested under various Heads.

  From a Series of Observations,
  during _Thirty Years_ Practice in the
  _CHEESE TRADE_.

  By _~J.  T W A M L E Y~_.

  The SECOND EDITION, Corrected & Improved.


  WARWICK:

  Printed for the AUTHOR by J. SHARP, and Sold by
  MESSRS. RIVINGTON’S _St. Pauls Church Yard_, and
  J. TAYLOR, No. 56 _Holborn_, LONDON, 1787.
  PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.


  _Enter’d at Stationer’s Hall._




PREFACE.


If a Dedication, or Introduction to the following Work should be
thought necessary, I most humbly, and justly address it to the
excellent DAIRY-WOMEN, of _Great Britain_; duly sensible, that from
them I received the first hints that led me to the performance,
and without whose assistance and encouragement, joined with my own
knowledge and experience, I should never have offer’d it to the Public.

The real design of this Work, is to assist those who are not fully
acquainted with the most proper methods, necessary to be used in the
management of a DAIRY; I have made it my endeavour to render every
part as plain and intelligent as possible, and am in hopes upon a due
Observation of the rules laid down many will find their account in it.
It is my sincere wish, that it may be a means of improving the quality,
as well as enlarging the quantity of CHEESE, through the Kingdom; and
become extensively useful to the community in general.

As the Publication of this Work has met with a very ready sale, & been
much approved of in general, and many who have carefully apply’d the
rules for Dairying therein laid down, have deriv’d great advantage from
it, which the Author has by many, been inform’d of; encourages him to
print a second Edition, and having omitted the other treatises upon
_Orchards_ and _Vegetation_, in order to bring the price more moderate,
hopes that, will cause it to be more read by DAIRY-WOMEN, who if they
pay a due attention to it, cannot help receiving benefit from the
advice it contains.




[Illustration]




Dairying Exemplified, _&c._


It has been the wonder of many People, who are interested in the
Article of Cheese, either as Makers or Dealers; that no Treatise or
Book of rules, or method of making Cheese, hath ever been attempted; or
the business of it examined, so as to direct those who are concerned
as Dairy-women, or have the chief management in Dairys, to become
proficients therein.

The great number of inferior Dairys there are, in comparison to the
few, that are excellent in their kind, or even what are called good
Dairys; every person who is much concerned in the Cheese Trade, is well
convinced of; and ’tis evident to a nice observer of the different,
yea, very different qualities of Cheese produc’d in different Dairys,
or even in the same Dairys, when either the Dairy-maid is changed, or
the usual method of Cheese-making, by the Mistress or manager of each
Dairy, is not strictly adhered to. A Remedy for this great deficiency
is looked upon as an affair of great moment, especially by those,
whose lot it is to be fixed in the Cheese Trade in a considerable
Dairy Country, where large quantities of Cheese, are annually bought;
and where, was Cheese-making in equal repute, or the real quality
of Cheese, equal in goodness to some neighbouring Counties, a much
larger quantity would certainly be made, and what would be a great
encouragement both to the makers and buyers of it, a better price would
be procured for the same Article, and a much readier Sale, than when of
an inferior quality.

Besides which, it is very clear that many People do not, for want of
a proper method, make near so much Cheese, from the same quantity of
Milk, as others do; or as even themselves might do, if a more proper
method was pursued. These considerations, having always been clearly
apparent, have from time to time, and as oft as an opportunity of
attaining any knowledge, in the business of making good Cheese hath
offered; led the Author of the following Treatise, to collect, weigh,
and investigate every particular circumstance leading to improve the
said art, or business; and hath enabled him from time to time, to
assist, and help many, by his advice and directions, to rectify and
amend many faults, and deficiencies, in the method, they followed;
and many have by such directions, greatly improved their Dairys.
And from constant experience and seeing the improvements, and the
effects produced from every different method practised or explained,
by such as he found most experienced, or best informed, for the space
of Thirty Years and upwards, he never fail’d to avail himself; this
hath constantly led him to scrutinize into the real cause, of every
impediment, or fault, in the method of making Cheese, from the first
step, or Milking the Cows, to the compleating or removing the Cheese
for Sale. And to point out a remedy to each complaint upon rational
principles, as far as they appear to him, and are confirmed by the
opinion of others, who have been in the way of making observations
of the same nature, and who give every encouragement to the Author
to make such improvements Public, for the general good. I am well
acquainted, how unthankful an office it is, to attempt to instruct or
inform Dairy-women, how to improve their method, or point out rules,
which are different from their own, or what hath always been practised
by their Mothers, to whom they are often very partial, as having been
esteemed the best Dairy-women of their time, and even when they have
imperceptably alter’d their method, by shortening the time in gathering
the Cheese, which is a term generally given for collecting the Curd at
the bottom of the Tub or Pan, after the runnet or rendless has done its
duty, or by putting a larger quantity of runnet into the Milk to hasten
the coming of the Cheese, which alteration, though often not observed
by the Dairy-maid, or Mistress, is of very material importance, and is
what I shall endeavour to explain, in as concise a manner as possible.
I doubt not, the same reflection will occur to the minds of some few
on reading my Book; as hath often done upon occasion, when I have in a
Dairy, met with any particular impediment in their Cheese, which the
Dairy-woman would fairly acknowledge she could not account for, and
hath tried every means she could think of to rectify without success;
saying, what does he know of Dairying, or how should a Man know any
thing of Cheese making?

But let these remember, that I have had frequent opportunities, of
consulting the best of Dairy-women, in many Counties, who I knew from
experience did know how to make good Cheese, and in order to have it in
my power to inform such as did not know how, I have taken great pains,
to inform myself, as many now living, in both situations can testify.

The principal faults that cause these difficulties to Dairy-women are,
Hove Cheese, Spongey, full of Eyes, Whey Springs, Jointed or Shook
Cheese, Split Cheese, Loose Cheese, or Cheese made of unsettled Curd,
Rank or strong Cheese, Flying out or Bulging at the Edges, Dry cracks
or Husky Coated Cheese, Blistering in the Coat, Blue-Pared, or Decayed
Cheese, Sweet or Funkey Cheese, Curdled or sour Milk Cheese, and
sometimes ill Smelling Cheese, from tainted Maw-skins, from distemper’d
Cattle, or some other cause, which by a strict observer may be
accounted for. Before a certain cure can be found out or applied, you
must be acquainted with the nature, and cause of the complaint, or if
by any accident, you hit upon a remedy, it may perhaps be a partial
one, or such as will not answer at all times, or in all Dairys, by
reason the complaint is from a certain fixt cause, and which cause will
at all times and in all places produce that effect; when perhaps, the
remedy apply’d may only be proper in some particular Dairys, owing to
Herbage, very rich Pasture or very Poor, to Clover ground, or ground
given to Noxious Weeds, Plants, or Trees, which the Cows eat of; each
of which if not known or considered will produce a different effect,
some of which effects may be similar in appearance to complaints in
other Dairys produced from different causes, the knowledge of which
will be of great use, to every Dairy-woman, or maker of Cheese to know,
as the operation of the work, or management and care of the Cheese when
made, must necessarily fall to their lot.

What relates to Pasturage; or the quality of Land for Grass, the
produce of the Land regarding Plants, Weeds, or Grass of different
kinds, falls more immediately under the eye or care of the Master, or
Farmer of the Land; and from observing from time to time, the state
of the Dairy, the Taste of the Cheese, so far as it may be affected
by any particular Herb, Weed, or Grass; the situation of the Cheese
in the Dairy-Chamber, how it is affected in different Seasons by
Heat, Cold, Damp or Dry Weather, to know what are the causes of many
general faults, or complaints in Cheese, such as Heaving, Splitting,
Jointing, Whey-Spring, Ill Formed, or Sweet Cheese, which often, when
any of these happen in a Dairy, are produced by one general cause, and
frequently go through the principal part of it, proceeding from the
same neglect, or mismanagement. These difficulties or deficiencies,
it is proper a Master should be acquainted with, as it often, I may
say, too often happens, the Mistress leaves the care of the Dairy to
Servants, especially the putting together the Milk, preparing the
Runnet and putting it into the Milk, the standing of the Milk till it
becomes Curd, and breaking or gathering it after it is come; which is
generally done by some common rule or method they have been used to,
the method used by a former Mistress perhaps, who might be esteem’d
a good Dairy-woman, and very likely undertook the management of the
Dairy herself; or at least so far as the essential part of the work
extended; paying a particular regard to the time of the operation
of the Runnet, in bringing the Cheese, or of gathering the Curd,
fixing, or setting it after it is come; each of which require a minute
exactness, and the principal error, or misfortune in Cheese making,
is owing to these operations being too hastily performed, not giving
time enough for the different effects to take place; for if due regard
is paid to making good Curd, you will very easily make good Cheese;
few people in any business make good Goods of bad Materials, tho’ many
of the most ignorant, when provided with good Materials, prepared for
that purpose, will finish them in a Workman-like and Masterly manner;
so will many a Dairy-maid, make very handsome Cheese and take care of
it, till it comes to be very good, and so as to give credit to the
seller, as well as the vender of it, that has no consistent idea how
the Runnet operates, or perhaps of the different states of the Curd,
in its various stages, or even when it is in a proper state to begin
the part of the work which usually falls to her share, of Breaking,
Vatting, and preparing it for putting in the Press, which former part
should be the care of the Mistress, or at least of some Person who
does understand it, to prepare the Curd for them. The business of a
Dairy, is of a considerable importance, and is in some Places, half,
or nearly the whole income, or produce of a Farm. The difference is so
great between a very good Dairy-woman, an inferior one, and a very bad
one, as would surprise, even a judicious observer, and the following
observations, which flow from what have happened in my own walks,
will be apt to strike conviction on the minds of many, who have never
applied their thoughts to the Theory of Dairying. The general way that
the art of Dairying has been carried on for Ages, has been progressive,
or traditional, being taught by Mother to Daughter, from common and
continual experience; naturally adopting from time to time, the methods
that appear’d best from such as have happened to come within their own
knowledge; without ever calling in the assistance of either Philosophy,
by which they might learn the different qualities, and effect of
materials they use, or knowledge, how to apply them in a Physical, or
Practical manner. And although the Author of this Treatise, is very
conscious of the deficiency of his own knowledge; yet has great hopes
that from the desire of making himself useful to community, with the
assistance of reason and common sense, he shall be able to render
some assistance, to those he wishes to serve. A kind providence hath
provided for all our wants; Nature, as Nature, is compleat in all its
parts; we, often in trying to improve it, distort, or throw it into
confusion; our Ideas being inadequate to the attempt. Where nature
points out, or leaves any open for improvement, in the use of any of
the common necessarys of Life, it is the duty of individuals to take
the hint, and endeavour to explain them for Public good. The present
System of Dairying, being in a very imperfect state, I am in hopes,
my endeavours to render service and improvement, will not be found
unnecessary.

A Cow, may I think justly be stiled, the most useful of all Animals,
in regard to Man; Milk is a support to our Infancy and greatly
contributes both to our comfort and support through Life, not only
supplying our present wants, by that salubrious aliment, but our
future wants, not only at home, but abroad; by the Cheese and Butter
produced from it, it supplies us, even with many luxuries in our
taste, is a great support to weakly constitutions by its Veal, as
well as a great support in the Article of Provisions, afforded when
alive; when Dead, is to us the grand stamina of our Food, Beef, being
the most nourishing and agreeable repast; it not only supports us at
home, but supplies our Fleets, our Armies, our Garrisons and Islands
all over the World; its Leather, so useful for Shoes, for Implements
of Husbandry, for Travelling, and for innumerable Conveniences; its
Hair for our Buildings and other purposes; its Tallow for our Light at
Home and Abroad; its Horns and Hoofs, and even its very Bones for our
Implements, and various Materials of Trade. Were all its excellencies
enumerated; they would be very extensive.

Milk, must be allowed one of its most useful productions; it is given
for our use in a pure, wholesome, and nutritive state; capable of
improvements, or alterations, of its nature, according to our different
wants. In the Article of Cheese, and Butter, a great deal depends on
the Art, Judgment, Care and Diligence of the Performer, and the good
or bad qualities of each, chiefly depend on the skill and industry of
the Dairy-woman. On a judicious observation you will find, that Milk
is generally found even at different Seasons, to be of a regular and
equal stamina, or quality, and in the same manner affected by different
fluxings; by Salts, Liquids, Spirits, &c. at all times; the business
of Cheese making, is a regular and constant proceeding, practised
perpetually, every Day, time immemorial; and it seems strange, that
when the ingredients you employ are so few, and their nature also so
exceeding regular, and certain, that there can be much difficulty,
in producing the Article of Cheese pure, and compleat; but daily
experience convinces us, that there is an amazing difference in the
goodness of Cheese, insomuch that you can scarce find two Dairys
that are exactly, or even very much alike; it does not occur to the
knowledge of every one what that difference is, but to a Person who
deals largely in it, and makes observations upon it, must plainly
appear; and though so few have ever attempted to scrutinize the nature
of Cheese, or particularly of Cheese making, in a manner that yields
conviction to its improvements; yet there is no reason, why that useful
branch of knowledge cannot, or may not, be clearly explained.

The business has been in the hands of the Women hitherto, except in
_Cheshire_, _Wilts_, some part of _Gloucestershire_, &c. where a large
quantity of Cheese is made, a Man is employ’d as an assistant, the
weight of a large _Cheshire_ Cheese, being too great to be wrought by
a Woman, and turning, rubbing, washing, and cleaning, is more than
one Man can easily perform; ’tis common in large Dairys, to meet
with Cheeses, Eighty, one Hundred, one Hundred and Twenty, or even
one Hundred and Forty pounds a Cheese, which requires considerable
strength to manage. In some part of _North-Wiltshire_, I am informed
there are Dairys that make Twenty-five Tons in a Year; and some few
more than that. A Gentleman told me, that being lately at _Bath_, he
was informed of a Person within less then Twenty Miles, who Milk’d
200 Cows: Which led his curiosity to take a ride to see it, being a
considerable Factor, who had frequent opportunity of buying Dairys
of Four, Five, or Six Tons each; but had never met with any Dairy of
that extent. On hearing the recital of it, led me to the same thought
as would naturally strike him, viz. what sort of a House or Premises
the Person must have to cure, spread or dispose of such a quantity
of Cheese, to get it ready for Sale? When he came to the Place, he
found the report was true, but then he milked these 200 Cows at three
different Houses, in number proportionable to the convenience or
situation of the Place. We often hear talk of _Cheshire_ Dairys of
100 Cows each, which the largeness of the Cheese in a great measure
accounts for. But what are called large Dairys in _Warwickshire_,
_Leicestershire_, _Staffordshire_, or _Derbyshire_, is from 20 to 40
Cows each; in these parts, from general observations I have made,
each Dairy may produce annually on an average three Hundred Weight
of Cheese from each Cow, taking the Dairys in general. I am inclined
to think more Dairys produce less than that quantity, than there are
that produce more; but this is observable, much the greater number
of Dairys, are on Tillable, or Arable Farms, where new Grass is
introduced, which is always allowed to make less Cheese than good
old Turf; and the proportion of up-land Farms, is much greater than
of low-land. I have weighed many times Four Hundred from a Cow, and
some few Dairys which have produced Five Hundred from each Cow; but
then in scrutinizing into the affair, I find it has been attended
with particular circumstances, such as being situate, in an excellent
Grass Country, where Meadows of dry Old Turf have been the Pasture,
where clear streams of running Water have gone through the Meadows,
affording always good Beverage for the Cows, as well as a cool retreat
for them in Hot Weather; by which means their Milk was kept in a
temperate state, while Cows on up-lands, perhaps scorched with heat,
and not having the nourishing stream to go to, or shade to protect
them from the Sun, cause their gadding, or running about to such a
degree, as prevented the increase of their Milk, in any proportion to
what the running stream produced; and throw’d the Cows into such a
heat and disorder, that their Milk would not yield near the quantity
of Curd, and caused many difficulties in making the Cheese, which the
cooler Dairys were not exposed to, (especially, when under the hand
of an unskilful Dairy-woman,) likewise, in these prolific Dairys, the
owner made a point of never keeping a Cow that was too old Milcht, or
Milk’d too long from the time of Calving, or when any Cow went off her
Milk either by any accident, or otherwise; then the Dairy-man always
replaced her with a new Milcht one, either drying the old Milcht one
for feeding, or disposing of her. That so the Dairy by that means was
kept in full vigour through the Grass Season. The number of these
Dairys is so very few and rare, they can only at most show the World
what may be done. I have been told by a _Wiltshire_ Factor, that the
Land in their principal Dairy Country, is so Rich and Good that it
is not very uncommon there for prime Dairys to yield five Hundred of
Cheese from a Cow; but then there is also every Advantage in their
Favour; such as (I believe no body who judgeth from the goodness
of their Cheese, but must allow) the best of Dairy-women, who have
been regularly bred to it from their Childhood, it generally being
almost the sole employ of the Farm, and those Dairy-women led on by
the greatest and most powerful emulation, of selling for the highest
Price. Their Cheese being generally sold, retail, at a penny, and often
two-pence per Pound, more than good Cheese in common. Their Cheese,
that is made in the prime of the Season, generally known in the country
by the name of _Marlborough_ Cheese, being much brought to Fairs by
_Marlborough_ Factors, or People residing not far from thence. Or in
_London_, by the name of _North Wiltshire_ Cheese, which always bears
the greatest Price of any Dairys, except those of _Gloucestershire_;
which, even the finest of _Barclay Hundred_, do scarce come up to: And
I believe by many judicious People, some of the _Wiltshire_ Dairys are
even allowed to excel. Likewise, in many very principal Dairys, they
have this great Advantage; where Gentlemen in some places, occupying
a large tract of Ground, or Lordship, either themselves, Stewards,
Bayliff, or some other Person for them, Stock the whole or chief Part
with Milking Cows, which they are very particular to get to come in, or
calve, by the Time Grass is in Vigour. Then these Dairy People agree
with them for the Milk of such a number of Cows, as they can manage at
a given Price per Week. The Gentleman, Bailiff, _&c._ engaging, that if
any Cow fails in her Milk before a given Time, that he will take her
away and replace her with a new Milcht one, by which means their Dairys
are always in full Power all Summer; and then they engage for the
Winter Dairy, at a Price proportioned to the state of the Cows, either
new, or old Milcht, by which means they are certainly enabled to make
a larger quantity of Cheese than any common Dairy, or Land of inferior
kind without these Advantages. And in many Dairys they make Cheese all
the Year, as the quantity of Winter Cheese, and Fodder Cheese, sent
to _London_ Markets clearly shews.--Much depends on the situation of
Dairy-ground, being nearer, or farther from the House, where the Cheese
is made, as Cows being driven any considerable distance to be Milked,
causeth the Milk to Heat in their Udders in Summer-time; Milking
them in the Field and carrying the Milk on Horse-back in Churns, or
Barrels to much Distance, I take to be still worse, as that perpetually
disturbs the Milk, inclining it to the nature of Churning Cream for
Butter, and the operation performed upon it, is quite of a different
nature, as it is for a different purpose or design, and if Milk is put
in a violent Motion by carrying, it makes it in some degree partake
of the nature of Churning, insomuch, that you often observe round the
Bung, Plug, or Stopple of the Churn, a Froth or Scum, work out by force
of Air, or Motion in carrying, that very nearly partakes of the nature
of Butter, which plainly shews that the Body of Milk, cannot be in a
proper State to make Cheese with, as Butter is produced by violent
Motion, and the making of Cheese from a state of Rest, being directly
opposite. I take it that oftentimes in very Hot Weather, the Milk in a
Cow’s Udder, much agitated by driving, or running about, is in a state
not very far different from that carried in a Churn, which frequently
makes the great difficulty in what is called bringing the Cheese or
fixing the Curd in the Tub, or Pan; I have often heard Dairy-women say
that ’tis sometimes very difficult to make it come at all, and instead
of one Hour, (the Time very commonly given by Dairy-women, in bringing
the Cheese,) that it will frequently not come in Three, Four, or Five
Hours; and then in such an imperfect state, as to be scarce capable of
being confined either in the Cheese-Vat or Press, and when released
from the Press, will heave, or puff up, by Splitting or Jointing,
according as the nature or state of the Curd happens to be. Whenever
People find their Cows in this situation which in Hot Summer Evenings
must often happen, especially, where Water is scarce, or in Grounds
where there is very little Shade; then it is, that making use of a
little cold Spring Water before earning, or rendling, is useful; as
that will make the Runnet take effect & the Milk coagulate much sooner.
It often happens, in some Dairys, that the Work is quite at a stand,
the Dairy-woman not knowing how to hasten the co-agulum, or coming
of the Cheese, thinks of putting more Runnet in, to forward it; but
the nature of Runnet being such, as will dissolve the Curd, in part
co-agulated, if more is put in; disturbs the whole, and prevents its
becoming Curd at all, or, in a very imperfect manner, remaining in the
Whey, in an undigested state that will neither turn to Curd or Cream,
and a principal part of the richest of the Milk is then cast away with
the Whey. Cold Water, with a little Salt, (as hereafter recommended)
will in a great measure prevent this difficulty. One great Point, or
Thing to be observed, in first setting off, or rendling the Milk, is
carefully to observe the state of the Milk, as to Heat or Cold; the
grand medium, or state it should be in when you put the Runnet into
it, is what may be properly understood, Milk-warm; if you find it to
be warmer than that, it is recommended, to put some fresh Spring Water
into it, in such quantity, as will reduce it to the Milk-warm state; a
Quart, Two, Three, Four or more according to the quantity of Milk to be
so cooled; many People may think Water will hurt the Milk or impoverish
the Cheese; experience shews it will not, but is a means of the Runnet
more immediately striking or operating with the Milk. I would recommend
the use of a Thermometer, to shew the degree of Heat Milk bears. I
doubt not one may be constructed on a very easy Plan, that will cost
a very little Money, and it will be very well worth while to be at a
small Charge, to regulate a fault, of putting Milk together too Hot,
which is of more ill consequence than People are aware of. The same use
holds good in putting Milk together for Butter; it is observed, that
Milk being set up too Hot, will not throw up Cream near so well, as
when in a temperate state, and causes it sooner to turn sour.[1]

As soon as the Milk is reduced to a proper warmth, and before you put
the Runnet to it, it is an exceeding good way to put a handful or two
of Salt into the Milk, or three or four handfuls if your quantity is
large (I recommend about two handfuls to ten or twelve Cow’s Milk;)
this will also cause the Runnet to Work quick, and giving a Saltness
to the whole, will be a means of preventing Sweet, or Funkey Cheese,
as it will make the Cheese all Salt alike, be a means to prevent Slip
Curd, or Slippery Curd, make the Curd sink in the Tub more readily,
and equally.[2] If your Milk is too Cold, let some Milk be warmed and
put into it, to bring it to the state of Milk-Warm, observing not to
warm a small quantity to make it boil, as boiling alters the nature of
Milk in some degree; scalding Heat is thought to set the Curd, making
it Tough, that it is judged best, to warm a tolerable good quantity of
Milk pretty warm, that it may give warmth to the whole in a sufficient
degree. Sometimes you will find in Cold Weather, your Milk in the time
of earning, get Chill; I have known in such a case, a Person take a Tea
Kettle of Hot Water and put into it, with success; let it be when the
Curd is nearly, or pretty well come, as then the Hot Water will give a
Toughness to the Curd, to relieve it from the slippery nature it had
acquired by being Chill, and that Chilness continuing to encrease, it
is with difficulty you can bring your Cheese into a regular or fixed
state. It is a very common way with many Dairy-women to allow the Milk
to stand an Hour, in earning, or after the Runnet is put in, before it
is gather’d, or sunk; many I fear content themselves with thinking it
sufficiently come in less time, _But here_ lies the greatest mischief
in Cheese-making; the Milk is very often disturbed before its proper
time, and sometimes when the whole is in a state of Slip-Curd, or
Slippery Curd, which is a state all Curd is in, before it becomes solid
Curd, or Curd, fit to make Cheese with. You are always to observe that
the state in which it is when you first stir or disturb it, in that
state the Curd will remain; it never improves as Curd, or becomes
better Curd after it is disturbed or removed from its state of rest.

You will generally observe, that when you sink the Curd in the Tub,
even when it is in a tolerable good state, as many imagine, there will
bits of Slip-Curd swim about in the Whey and not sink with the rest,
till the Whey is laden from it: That slip-Curd will not adhere to, or
join with the solid Curd, and though ever so well broke or separated,
yet in whatever state it is, when the Cheese is made, it all dissolves,
or melts; if a bit as big as a Nut happens together, it dissolves
into a Whey-Spring, runs out, and leaves a hole in the Cheese, which
always decays in that place; if a bit as big as a Pin’s-head happens,
it dissolves, and leaves an Eye in its place, and that is the cause of
Eyes in Cheese; if you cut the Cheese when young, you will find, that
there is a Moisture, or Wet, in every Place where the Eye is after it
is dried up, which Wet or Moisture is called Tears.[3]

When a large quantity of slip-Curd is in a Cheese, ’tis a long Time
before it becomes hard, appearing always loose within; which, when the
Cheese is dry, on cutting, it appears like a Honey-comb.

The thing that more Dairy-women err in, than any other, is gathering
or sinking the Cheese too soon. The rendling of Cheese, causeth a
very great Fermentation; there must be time given for the fixt Air in
Cheese, or Curd, set to work by the Runnet, to dissipate, expand, or
fly off. Runnet is a thing so powerful in its effect, as to have no
substitute yet found that can be used in its place; all Fermentations
remove or separate the fixed Air, from the different Bodies they are
connected with.

The effect of Runnet on Milk is very great, and in order to thoroughly
fix the Curd, it must have sufficient Time to work, concrete, or
congeal the Curd into a solid Mass by extirpating the Air from it; if
you remove or disturb the Milk before its full Time, yet the Runnet
having begun its operation, though you do not give it Time to work,
by reason of hurrying it forwards, yet when it is again at rest, such
Air as hath not been separated, by breaking, squeezing or pressing,
will extend itself, and the Air will find a vent, or expand itself into
a greater compass than it was before confined in; and whether it is
in the Press, or after it comes out of the Press, will find a way to
discharge itself; many times to that degree, when in the Press, as to
even burst the Cheese-cloth it is wrapt in, if it is so confined that
it cannot escape by it. If it does not get discharged otherways, then,
as soon as the Press is let up, it will shatter the Cheese within to a
surprizing degree, and immediately cause the Cheese to heave, or puff
up, even in that state, which so separates the Curd in the Cheese, as
it seldom settles again, unless taken quite in Time, or before the Curd
is connected in the Press. A good way to prevent this disorder, of what
is called Cheese heaving in the Press, from taking a bad effect, which
complaint generally happens when the Milk is put together too hot, and
the Whey that comes from it, is left white (which it ought never to
be, for then you may be sure all is not right); when the Cheese has
first been in the Press an Hour or more, let the Press up and if you
find the Cheese swell, or blister, take a large Needle, or fine Skewer,
of Wood or Iron, and pierce it in many places to let the Air out; a
Pin is not so well, as Brass taints the Cheese, and it will appear of
a tainted brassy colour ever after: If you find when the Cheese comes
again out of the Press, that it still swells, or blisters, apply the
Needle again, and it may perhaps settle again so as to make a useful
Cheese; it will never be a good one, but will remain in the state
called loose Cheese or shook Cheese. Thus you may discern somewhat of
the nature of slip-Curd; every Dairy-woman should take care to become
as well informed of the different properties, its nature, cause of its
Formation, and manner of operating as possible, in order thereby to
avoid the many difficulties proceeding from it, which are more numerous
than all others, in the whole system of Cheese-making put together,
and have been by them, the least considered and examined. In order
to avoid many difficulties, and render you complete Mistress of the
first part of the work, which is a very material Crisis, take care to
be well informed of the nature of Maw-skin or Runnet-skin; it is very
proper every Dairy-woman should know how to prepare them for use, which
is very easily acquired; to know in what manner or to what degree it
should be salted, and how, properly dried, and take particular care
that you have the Maw fresh, not in a tainted or putrid state, you
may happen to have such a misfortune as to have it damaged either by
neglect, as to Time of preparing it, great heat of Weather, which
sometimes hurts our best and freshest Meat in a surprizing degree,
notwithstanding every care or caution taken to prevent it, or by the
Skin having any way taken Wet, or being Fly-blown; to many of which
mishaps the most careful Person, is sometimes exposed; any of which
quite alter the nature of it; being of a more particular construction
than any other thing, which must appear plain, when ’tis considered,
that you cannot substitute or apply any one Thing, in the Article of
making Cheese to a proper effect, or that will answer your purpose of
extracting Curd from Milk in order to make Cheese with, but Maw-skin;
and you will find that when the Skin is damaged or tainted, it looses
its fermenting quality considerably; that it will either not take
effect at all, or in a very partial and slow degree, and you will often
find Cheese made from tainted Maw-skin appear of a putrid, unsettled,
ill-tasted, discoloured nature, being affected in a different manner,
according to the degree of Putrifaction the Maw-skin has received.
Sometimes I have perceived the Cheese of a dusky black colour, not
fixt in its Texture, or become solid and close; sometimes, in Taste
resembling the flavour of tainted Beef or Mutton, when it comes to
your Table; sometimes it has the smell of rotten or addled Eggs,
sometimes of the most insipid or tasteless nature, which on enquiring
into the cause, could never be explained to me by the Maker. Sometimes
an ingenious, well-disposed Person, who wished for Improvement, or to
become acquainted with the nature or consequence of such complaint,
would hint to me, her fear was, the Maw-skin was damaged; tho’ I have
had some, who instead of being open to conviction, or that would pay
any regard either to my Opinion or Advice, would tell me that could
not be cause, for they always prepared their own Maw-skins, and no
one could be more careful to cure them properly, which was the reason
they always avoided buying Skins as much as possible, for fear of
that misfortune. All this care and precaution I doubt not was just,
as from the great care many People take of their Dairy in every other
respect, would be particularly cautious about their Maw-skins; but let
themselves judge, whether some of the afore recited causes, might not
happen to their best endeavours. When I have come to a place where the
Dairy-woman has informed me she has been deceived in her Maw-skins,
being then I thought on sure ground, or certainty of the cause, I
have been very careful to become acquainted with the real nature of
the ill effects produced in consequence thereof, and have always
found some of the evils before-mentioned, and could often judge from
the state I found the Cheese in, in what manner, or to what degree
it was affected thereby, and even so as often to convince the Maker
of it, that my Opinion was right. If at any Time this misfortune is
apparent to you, that some neglect, or mishap has taken place in curing
your Maw-skins, you will easily guess from which of the above causes
they spring; and perhaps in a course of Time, you may become well
convinced, that every one of these mischances do sometimes happen, and
as you must certainly be a better, or more competent judge of the real
nature of the complaints, (than any other Person can be from common
observation,) you will most likely, find other causes of damage, or
misfortune that happens in the process, more than I have enumerated;
and if any material one, it would be exceeding useful to have it made
Public, for the benefit of Society, or to warn those of the damage,
whose Business it is to supply the Market with Skins for Sale. When
you perceive any of your Skins have miscarried, that they are either
tainted, or otherways damaged, take particular notice how they appear;
in what respect they differ from perfect Skins, knowing, that the
like causes produce similar effects, and then if you are obliged to
buy Skins, you will be enabled to avoid buying such as have the faults
you are acquainted with. I have often been led, when in a Shop where
Maw-skins were on Sale, to examine them somewhat minutely, and could
perceive in some of them much difference; I have seen in the same
Skin sometimes, the appearance of very different qualities; I have
observed discoloured Spots on holding it up to the Light; I have seen
one part of a Skin of a well-coloured sound nature, another part that
had somewhat the look of rough Parchment, or hard Whit-leather; on
smelling, it has not appeared of the same nature, or relish, with the
rest; I have also observed Skins that have appeared quite tainted, and
even in a decaying state, and have seen Rendless after being made,
appear of a dusky blackish colour. A Dairy-woman should be acquainted
with these complaints, in order to avoid the difficulty that inevitably
accrues for want of that knowledge, and should frequently taste the
Runnet when made, that she may find out in Time if there is any thing
disagreeable attends it; for there is no making good Cheese with bad
Runnet.

The Maw-skin, or bag of the Abomasus, is the Maw or Stomach of Calves,
that have fed on nothing but Milk, and are killed before the digestion
is perfected, it contains an Acid Juice called Runnet, Rennet, or
Earning, with which Milk is co-agulated, or rendered into Curd for
making Cheese; in the Maw the Chyle is formed, that causes this
co-agulum; but it greatly looses this effect, when Calves have fed
on Vegetable Food; the Maw of House-Lamb, I am informed will answer
the same purpose, but not of Grass Lamb. I have heard of a person who
Salted the Curd, or Crudity that was found in the Maw at the Time
the Calf was killed, prepared as the Maw-skin is, with good effect,
only used in a larger quantity. This may easily be tried by way of
experiment; I never heard of but one Person who used it, and she is
now dead; that prevented my enquiry about it. Since the above was
publish’d I am informed, that in the last Age, the principal part of
the Cheese was made from the Curd, of the Maw prepared with Salt, till
it was found the Skin was of a more clean and wholesome nature. It is
observable as an old Maxim, that although Runnet readily co-agulates
Milk, yet if put in when already co-agulated, it dissolves it.

There are many ways of making, or preparing Maw-skins; the best and
most approved I ever met with is, as soon as your Maw is got cold, when
taken from the Calf (for ’tis known that salting Meat hot, in sultry
Weather, will make it taint,) let it be a little swilled in Water; some
People say ’tis better not to be clean’d at all, and the effect will
be greater, it coming nearer to real nature, and the reason given,
is this, ’tis the inside of the Maw that has the effect in Runnet,
and the chyle proceeding from it, the outside being little otherwise
than any other Entrail. Rub the Maw well with Salt, then fill it, and
afterwards cover it with Salt; some cut them open and spread them in
Salt, one over another in layers, and let them continue in the Brine
they produce, sometimes stirring, or turning them, for four, six, or
nine Months, as they can spare them, then open them to dry, being
stretched out with sticks or splints, that they may dry regularly;
when they are dry they may be used; though, ’tis reckon’d best to be a
Year Old before used, keeping them one Year under another. Do not let
them in drying, be too near a Fire; if heated too much, renders them
liable to reeze, (as Bacon will, when melted by heat,) and hurts their
quality, giving them a rancid taste; many People think, the Brine they
are prepared in, very useful in making your Runnet, putting it amongst
it as other Brine, with smaller proportion of Runnet. People differ in
their way of preparing Runnet or Rendless. Many will make it with Whey;
some will put in with the Whey, the Brine drippings that come from the
Cheese when in the Press. Both these I quite disapprove; Whey, having
already undergone purgation, fermentation, or separation of the Curd
from Milk, is more likely to become viscid, or gummy, acrid, or sharp,
or liable to putrifaction than a more pure element. Brine drippings
are of a gross foul nature, and may be deem’d, (if the expression
may be allowed) even the very excrements of Cheese-making, and what
ought never to be put in, in order to bring the Cheese, causing a rank
and foul smell as well as taste, I take it to be the worst of all
disagreeables.

The way most approved by good Dairy-women, or such as have fallen
within my knowledge is this; take pure Spring Water, in quantity
proportion’d to the Runnet you intend to make; it is thought best by
some, about two Skins to a Gallon of Water; boil the Water, which makes
it softer or more pure, make it with Salt into Brine that will swim an
Egg, then let it stand till the heat is gone off, to about the heat of
Blood warm, then put your Maw-skin in, either cut in pieces or whole:
the former I should imagine best or most convenient; letting it steep
for twenty-four Hours, or two Meals, (so called in Dairying) and it
is fit for use, putting such a quantity into your Milk as you judge
necessary, for rendling your quantity of Milk into Curd; observing that
too much Runnet makes the Cheese strong and liable to heave, and is
what many People call, tastes of the Bull, or Bull Cheese (especially
when Brine drippings are put in.) Too little Runnet makes it very
mild, and must have more time to stand, before it is broke, or sunk:
The judgment required, in the quantity of Runnet, to be used must be
regulated by your own prudence, increasing or lessening it as you find
it necessary; ’tis often reckon’d, about a Tea-cup full, to ten Cows
Milk. If you make a quantity of Runnet together to keep for use, let
the same method be used, increasing the quantity of each material to
what you want, putting it in jars or bottles, till you want it.

I have frequently heard Dairy-women mention putting in rose leaves and
spices of different kind into the Rennet at the Time of preparing it,
in order to give it a relish, and make the Cheese fine flavor’d.

_Mr. Hazard_, in his Essay to the _Bath_ Society gives a receipt for
making Rennet after this manner; when the Maw-skin is well prepared and
fit for the purpose, three pints or two quarts of soft Water (clean and
sweet) should be mix’d with Salt, wherein should be put sweet briar,
rose leaves and flowers, cinamon, mace, cloves, and in short almost
every sort of spice and aromatic that can be procured, and if these are
put into two quarts of Water they must boil gently till the liquor is
reduced to three pints, and care should be taken that this liquor is
not smoaked; it should be strained clear from the spices &c. and when
found to be not warmer than Milk from the Cow, it should be poured
upon the Vell or Maw, a lemon may then be sliced into it, when it may
remain, a day or two, after which, it should be strain’d again and put
in a bottle, where if well corked, it will keep good for twelve months
or more, it will smell like a perfume, and a small quantity of it
will turn the Milk and give the Cheese a pleasing flavour--he farther
adds--after this, if the Vell or Maw, be salted and dried for a week or
two near the Fire, it will do for the purpose again almost as well as
before.

A very material circumstance to be attended to in Cheese-making, is the
time allow’d for the Cheese coming, or from the time allow’d for the
Runnet to take effect, or the time when the Milk is at rest, called
earning time.[4] Which should on no account be less than an hour and
half; all that is stirred, gather’d, or sunk, in less time is liable
to danger. It may happen, and often does, that it will come sooner,
especially when the method I have recommended of putting Salt in the
Milk is used, and where care is taken to have the Milk of a proper
warmth, as in these cases the Curd co-agulates or collects sooner on
that account; I believe it will be found that the additional time given
will never be of any bad consequence, as the Curd then gets firm, and
on sinking, becomes more solid, and is easier made into Cheese, in less
time, and with much less trouble, than when stirred or broke sooner.
What is called sunk Cheese is always allowed to be the fattest; when
Curd is fully set, or fixed of a solid nature, by having time enough,
it will incline to sink to the bottom of the Tub, by the assistance of
the Hand to gently Press it down, gather, or collect it, and will soon
become of a solid nature; most People break the Curd, by stirring it
round several times with the Bowl, in order that it may be collected
together. Sinking, is performed by getting it down, or sinking with the
Hand, without breaking.

In order to prevent a difficulty in getting the Whey to separate easily
when sinking the Curd, you may prepare a long Cheese Knife made with
a Lath, one edge being sharpened to cut the Curd a cross from top to
bottom, in the Tub, three or four different times crossing the lines,
checkerwise, by which means the Whey rises through the vacancies made
by the Knife, and the Curd sinks with much more ease. I have also known
a sieve used to facilitate or hasten the Curd sinking, with success, as
it gives an opportunity to lade off the Whey clear from Curd, gets the
Curd down much easier and saves time.

When all the Curd is got firm at the bottom of the Tub, by pressure
of the hand, let all the Whey be taken from it; then let it stand
one quarter of an Hour for the Curd to settle, drain, and get solid,
before you break it into the Vat; if any bits of slip-Curd happen to
be swimming in the Whey, that does not sink with the rest, it had
better be put away with the Whey, than put to the Cheese, as it will
not cement or join with the solid Curd, and all slip-Curd, as before
observed, dissolves or melts, so that it is a detriment to Cheese when
ever put in; many People, as soon as the Whey is removed, immediately
break the Curd small as possible, and then put it into the Cheese Vat,
for finishing. I would always recommend that it rest one quarter of an
Hour, before ’tis broke, or vatted; the Cheese would be much better for
it, as the Air would more easily separate, and prevent its puffing up
under your hand, when squeezing in the Vat, and also prevent the Fat
squeezing out, as it often does through your Fingers; which being so
much broke, occasions, and certainly it must make your Cheese, both
leaner and lighter. I have consulted many good Dairy-women, on the
Article of breaking Cheese, and find, ’tis the most general method to
break the Curd as small as possible, when put into the Vat; but what
makes that more absolutely necessary, is, there being slip-Curd amongst
it, and that never appears to embody, or join with the rest, unless
broke and thoroughly mixed; and even then I am fully convinced is of no
use for the reason above given; although I have laid it down as a rule,
never to stir or gather the Cheese in less than an Hour and half, many
of the best Dairy-women I have ever consulted, generally let it stand
two Hours; by which time the Curd is got to be of so firm a nature, as
to render the breaking of it at all absolutely needless, it being got
so solid, they only cut it in slices, put it into the Vat and work it
well into it, by squeezing thoroughly to make it firm and close, then
put it into the Press, and no more is needful. The finest, fattest and
best Cheese I have seen, I have been informed was made this way; there
is sure to be no sweet Cheese, horny-coated, or jointed Cheese made
in this manner; sometimes I have observed Cheese that has been sunk,
tho’ very fat and well tasted, that would become very hard and cut
chiselly, which I take to be owing to the Curd getting very cold and
set hard before Vatted, to prevent its doing so, it may be necessary
to break the Curd and not give it quite so much time in earning; as
many People prefer Cheese that is not so very solid, or that has a
mellow softness, which breaking will give it; although it is reckon’d
the best quality to cut solid, and flakey; remembering that giving
it more time in earning makes it more solid, and shortening the time
makes it less so. Many Dairy-women are much puzzled concerning the
cause of sweet Cheese, forming different ideas about it; I am fully
convinced it is wholly caused by stirring or breaking it too soon in
the Tub, by which means the Runnet has never taken full effect, nor
is any slip-Curd ever fit to make Cheese with, in what ever state it
may appear, unless in soft Cheese, or slip-coat Cheese; for when Curd
is quite in a slippery state, especially if very warm, salt will have
very little effect on it, which is the cause it is so apt to putrify
and dissolve, and a very principal cause why Cheese becomes sweet, is,
its not having taken salt, as you may generally perceive Cheese that
is much jointed or blue-pared has scarce any relish or saltness in it.
When the Whey is of a white colour the Curd is not fully settled, and
if it is so to any great degree, the Cheese is sure to be sweet, and
in that case you always cast away great part of what should be Cheese,
for the Whey thus put away would neither turn to Butter nor Cheese,
though of a considerable substance, remaining of an undigested nature:
If you pursue the method I have laid down, you will always find the
Whey quite green, which is the colour it ought to be of; and let more
or less be the time you adopt to put your Cheese together, if the
Whey is not green, depend upon it your Cheese is not properly come,
or your Maw-skin is not good, or quantity of Runnet not sufficient.
It is difficult to ascertain what quantity of Runnet is required to
bring a Cheese in the most proper manner, as the quality of the Skin
is so various, and strength of Runnet, as well as quality of Milk so
different; People are much divided in opinion, whether ’tis the best
way to make your Runnet fresh every Day, or to prepare a quantity
together, according to the quantity you want and bottle it up for use;
in large Dairy’s it must be best to make a quantity together, as you
certainly must be a better judge of the quality, or what quantity is
necessary, than when the making is left to chance, as by that means you
may regulate the quality and taste of your Cheese better, and have more
dependance on the time of its coming.

The best Dairy-women I have known, in general, recommend the latter
method.

The cause of jointing or wind-shook Cheese, is from a small quantity
of slip-Curd being much broke, so as not sufficient, to form Eyes in
the Cheese; but which is sufficient when dissolved through the whole
mass, to leave a vacancy, which generally unites in a perpendicular
direction, and forming cracks or joints within the Cheese, and sinking
joints nearly like to cracks on the outside. If it happens to any
considerable degree, it causes the Cheese to have very little taste,
generally turns blue-pared whilst under a year old, and often rotten
Cheese when older; most dry rotten Cheese is produced from this effect,
unless when bruises, or cracks are the cause. Wet, or moist rotten is
generally produced by a larger quantity of slip-Curd; having never
united in a solid state, nor taken any salt, becomes very putrid and
rots, and as the Cheese dissolves, is often very wet or moist. I have
several times seen Cheese that has appeared sound till cut, that
afterwards had not a pound of sound Cheese in a whole one. Spungy
Cheese is such as partakes of the elastic or springing quality of a
Spunge, I take it to be produced from Curd, which has nearly undergone
every proper fermentation to make the Curd unite, but leaves it in
a very tough state, caused by the over heat of the Milk when put
together. Rank, or strong Cheese is generally caused by too great a
quantity of Runnet, and that Runnet made too strong to operate in the
time given, or from Runnet being made with foul materials; hove, or
heaved Cheese is caused by different means; when the quantity of Air in
Cheese increases after the Cheese has been some time made, I suppose
such Air to be rarified by a greater heat than the Cheese has before
been in, the coat being got hard and the pores much closed, the Air
expands within, and causes the Cheese to rise or swell, in a round
form; this is very visible when you put a taster into the Cheese or a
pin to let out the Air, it rusheth forth with a strong wind, of a rank
disagreeable smell, caused by the Air being discharged from putrid or
undigested Curd. Sometimes, if Cheese is laid cool when first made,
or coming from the Press, is dried outwardly by means of a harsh cool
Air, when at the same time the inside of the Cheese remains in a moist
state, though the coat is hard and dry; when that Cheese is exposed to
heat, either by lying near a hot Wall, or near Tiles in hot Weather,
or by the immediate heat of the Sun, it will be drawn up, round, in
the same manner, and by the same cause that a board is made round or
coffer’d up, by the heat of the Sun; rank Cheese very often heaves,
from the cause before given that makes it rank: ’Tis very common for
Dairy-women, to ask, what will cure hove, or heav’d Cheese? I am fully
of opinion there is no cure for it after it is affected with heaving,
but to let the Air out of it, that it may close and settle again.
There has for many Years, been an ingredient sold in Shops, called
Cheese-powder, being made of nitre or salt petre, and bole armoniac
proportion’d thus, to one pound of salt petre, put half an ounce of
bole armoniac, both powder’d very fine, and well mixt together, rub
about one quarter of an ounce upon a Cheese, when put a second and
third time into the Press, about half on each side the Cheese at two
different meals, on the upper side, before you rub the salt on, that it
may penetrate the Cheese with it; these are very binding ingredients
and are sometimes found to be very serviceable, but nitre is apt to
give the Cheese an acetous or sourish taste, and if too much is put in,
and the Cheese is expos’d to great heat, will cause a fermentation,
that will encrease the quantity of Air in the Cheese & cause it to
swell more than it would if none had been put in. I have known many
things recommended as a cure, but could never find that any thing was
serviceable except the above, and piercing, or discharging the Air,
with a needle, wire, or skewer. The most powerful preventative to the
heaving of Cheese, is, to avoid making the Runnet too strong, or, not
to put too much into the Milk, to take care that your Runnet is not
foul, nor made either with Whey or Brine drippings, or tainted Skins,
to be certain that your Curd is fully come, not stirring it till it has
had time for the fermentation fully to take effect, to let it drain a
little before it is broke or vatted, and to keep the Cheese warm, till
it is got stiff, or had a sweat, and you will, by a careful attention
to these particulars, very seldom have any hove Cheese.

Cheese is very apt to split, or divide in the middle, by being salted
within, especially, when people spread salt across the middle of the
Cheese when the vat is about half filled, which Curd tho’ in a small
degree separated by salt, never closes, or joins, and is much easier
coffer’d up or drawn round than other Cheese; especially, thin Cheese
made in what we call _Glocester_ vats being round or rising in the
bottom, and the slider or Cheese-board that is laid over it, made
convex also, in order to make the Cheese thinned in the middle, that
it may dry quick, for early sale. Then, if salted within and being
laid soft on the shelf to dry, as it bears only on the edge all round,
it is almost sure to split; and it is often seen, scarce a Cheese in
some Dairys of this form but what do split; salting a little in the
Milk is greatly preferable, for these Dairys in particular; for as
salt dissolves, it keeps the inside of the Cheese moist or soft for
sometime, if salted in the Curd, which is what I would never recommend
to be done in any Dairy, especially across the middle as is often
done. I have sometimes known Cheese thus salted when there has been
much slip-Curd in it, and that, and the salt both dissolving together,
and the Cheese split, the vacancy shall contain a quantity of Water,
which if ironed when Young, gushes out, or else cracks the Cheese
when moved, and the Water runs out to a considerable degree, the same
thing must have been observed by other Factors, in some Dairys where
salting in the middle is used. Cheese is apt to bulge, fly-out, or
get round edged, when it is either kept soft, by being moist within,
or having too much slip-Curd or unsettled Curd, or elastic Air within
it. Dry cracks, or wind cracks are generally produced, by keeping Curd
from one meal to another which gets quite cold and fixed, and being
put together with Curd that is made of too hot Milk, these two, never
properly adhere, or join, and cause the coat to be harsh, and often
fly, or crack. Curdly or wrinkle-coated Cheese is caused by sour Milk,
chiefly when Cheese is made from two meals, as ’tis very common in hot
Weather for Milk to turn, or get sour in one night’s time, especially
if Milk is hot when set up, having been much heated in the Cow’s Udder,
and very probably much agitated and disturbed by Cows running about,
or being heated to a violent degree, or the Milk having been carried
in Churns or Barrels on Horse-back any distance; Cheese made of cold
Milk, especially if inclined to be sour, is apt to cut chiselly, or
that breaks or flies before the knife. Sunk coated Cheese is caused
by being made too cold, as you will often find Cheese that is made in
Winter or late in Autumn, will be, unless laid in a warm Room after it
is made. Two-meal Cheese is made with two meals, or night and mornings
Milk, which if put together pure, not having the Cream taken off, will
make nearly as good Cheese as new Milk, and much better if it must be
finished in one Hour, or less, or when new Milk Cheese is made with
Milk that is too hot.

What is generally known by the name of two-meal Cheese, is in
_Gloucestershire_ called second Cheese, being made from one meal new
Milk and one of old, or skimmed Milk, having the Cream taken away.
Skimmed Cheese, or Flet-Milk Cheese, is made from all skimmed Milk,
the Cream having been taken off the whole to make Butter, or for other
purposes: This sort of Cheese is much made in the County of _Suffolk_,
or at least goes by the name of _Suffolk_ Cheese, when at market, or
in _London_, where the principal part of it is disposed of; it being
much used on ship-board, not being so much affected by the heat of the
ship as richer Cheese, or so subject to decay in long Voyages, and
being bought at a low price, makes it much called for in that way.
There is but little art required in making this Cheese, if care is
taken of it, but yet there is great difference in the quality of it,
which I am fully convinced is principally caused by want of care; it is
not exposed to so many difficulties as richer Cheese, but Dairy-women
must remember, slip-curd has the same effect, in a lesser degree in
Skim Cheese as in new Milk; though the Milk being much weaker is not
in so much danger. An Hour, or an Hour and a Quarter is time enough to
give it in rendling; keep the Cheese warm when young, and cool after.
I know some Dairy-women do not give it three quarters of an Hour in
coming, and thereby find more difficulty than need be; paying little
regard to it, as they do not use it themselves, nor will it fetch much
money, yet I know some careful Dairy-women who make Skim cheese that
would deceive a common observer, in appearance, being made in the same
form as new Milk Cheese, well coloured, made clean, and better coated,
than many ordinary Dairys of new Milk Cheese.

I have paid in a Dairy of thirty Cows upwards of sixty Pounds in a Year
for skim Cheese, an object not unworthy a Dairy-man’s notice, some
people are of Opinion, the most Money to be made of the skim Milk of a
Dairy, is to feed Sows and Pigs with it, but this I must leave to those
concerned in the business. Some Dairy-women in order to enrich their
new Milk Cheeses will put the Whey Cream, into their Milk, which if
quite fresh, not older than one or two Meals, will improve it. To make
fine Cream Cheese, one meal of Cream extraordinary should be added to
the new Milk; this will make exceeding rich Cheese, but requires great
care, and should not be gathered or sunk in less than two Hours. I
apprehend two Hours and a half or three Hours will be found much better
in general.

The way recommended to make soft Cheese, or slip-coat Cheese, is,
take six quarts of new Milk hot from the Cow; the stroakings or
last Milkings are the best, being the richest Milk; put into it two
spoonfuls of Runnet, let it stand three quarters of an hour, or
till it is hard coming, or become full Curd; lay it into the Vat
with a spoon, not breaking it at all, laying upon it a trencher, or
flat-board; press it with a four pound weight, or if you find it gets
too hard, then press it with a lighter weight, turning it with a
dry cloth once an hour, and when got stiff, shift it every day upon
fresh grass or rushes; it will be fit to cut in ten or fourteen days,
or sooner, if the Weather be warm; many people use Baskets, made on
purpose, instead of Vats to make it in, this is esteemed in private
Families; where it is carried to market, Vats must be best, unless
carried in the Baskets.

To make brick-bat Cheese; in _September_, take two gallons of new
Milk, and a quart of good Cream; warm the Cream, put in two or three
spoonfuls of Runnet, when it is well come, break it a little, then put
it into a wooden mould in the shape of a brick, press it a little, then
dry it; it is best to be half a Year old before it is used, or more,
if you like it older; two hours is as little as it ought to be in
earning, or to stand before it is broke after the Runnet is put in, or
longer if the Whey is not inclined to be green. I am informed _Stilton_
Cheese is made in this way.

Cream Cheese is generally made in _Autumn_, the Milk being richer and
fatter in _August_ and _September_; by which means it has not the
warm Season to ripen it, and it is generally made thick, in order to
preserve it’s mellowness. Rich Cheese will not dry so fast as lean, nor
thick Cheese so soon as thin; in course it must get less hard in the
Season than common thin Cheese, by which means it is more exposed to
frost and chilling cold. I have often found that people who make Cream
Cheeses, find more casualty attend them, than in leaner, hard Cheeses,
owing to chillness, or being froze before they get hard; for when frost
gets much into Cheese, it destroys every good quality, and makes it
putrify, and become either insipid or ill tasted; Cream Cheese should
always be kept in a warm situation, and be particularly guarded from
frost, and till it has sweat well, or you will lose the advantage of
its richness. The contrary method is to be used with skim Cheese, as in
that, there is very little fat to sweat out, and chill Cheese is better
than harsh-meated, horney-coated Cheese; let it have what warmth you
can for about a fortnight after making, and then keep it cool.

In making slip-coat or soft Cheese, remember it is of quite a contrary
nature to hard Cheese; and instead of getting stiff, its best quality
is to have it run, or dissolve into a creamy substance; for which
reason it must be made with Slip-Curd, which alone will cause it so to
do; good Curd will always get harder by drying, but Slip-Curd will not
even become solid, or continue a Substance; this clearly demonstrates
my Sentiments on Slip-Curd as before related. It has generally been
reckoned that the Milk required to make one Pound of Butter will make
two Pounds of Cheese, and a larger quantity where Land is poor, the
Milk being weak will not afford so much Cream.

As colouring of Cheese is now become almost an universal practice, it
is highly necessary to pay a due regard thereto; Cheese, in its native
state, that is well Manufactured, being put together in proper time,
the Milk of proper warmth, well cleaned when young, and kept warm,
till being regularly Dry, will naturally be of a yellow cast, and when
a Year old will coat of a reddish or brown-red colour; the richer the
Cheese, the more ’tis inclined to appear in this manner, and you seldom
meet with Cheese of this native cast but what is exceeding good, being
fat, well-tasted, cuts flaky, is stout, or full-tasted, high-flavour’d
Cheese; and it is found that every country will produce some such
Cheese, when in the hands of skilful Dairy-folks, though it has yet
appeared in a small degree; you will find such Cheese among the fine
Dairys in _Cheshire_, _Double-Gloucester_, or _Thick-Gloucester_, being
made double the Thickness of common Cheese, _North-Wilts_, in some
few Dairys, in _Derby_, _Stafford_, _Leicester_, and _Warwickshires_,
but there being so small a proportion of this best Cheese, and the
demand for it being larger than the supply, a substitute is thought
necessary, to make good Cheese look as much like fine Cheese as
possible, from which cause the art of colouring originates, and much
increases.

It is remarked by dealers in Cheese as well as others, that a much
greater part of the People that eat Cheese, have little Idea how it
is produced; they, finding the best Cheese of the fullest, or yellow
colour, naturally conclude, or are led to think, that Cheese of a pale
colour, must be made with inferior (or skimmed) Milk. So much this Idea
prevails, that it is well known, in _London_, a Cheese-monger will more
readily sell good Cheese of a full colour than fine Cheese of a pale or
inferior colour; _London_ being the principal Market, or place where
the greatest quantity of the best Cheese is sold. Colouring formerly
used to be performed by various Drugs, as _Turmerick_, _Sanders_,
_&c._ by _Marigolds_, _Hawthorn-buds_, and the like. The principal
ingredients now used is _Annatto_, and in its best kind, is much the
best colouring that ever was found out. _Annatto_ is of two sorts,
known by the name of _Spanish-Annatto_ and _Flag-Annatto_, the former
is much the best for Cheese-colouring; being of a hard substance,
and proper in kind, or texture, dispensing its colour in a regular
and free manner, without being subject to much waste or decay. The
_Flag-Annatto_ is brought over in a moist state, and wrapped in large
broad _Flags_, which keeps it in some degree from waste; it is brought
in that state chiefly for the Dyers use, and is a principal Article in
Dying Orange-colour; if this sort is used in colouring Cheese before
it gets hard, it is apt to appear in the Milk of an oily nature which
prevents the colour taking effect in a regular manner, and is some
detriment to the coming of Cheese; if it is kept till quite dry and
hard, which in course of time it will be, perhaps in six, nine, or
twelve Months, it is then very little inferior to _Spanish_. Of this
last ingredient, mixt with others, the Druggists and Blue makers in
_London_, make large quantities of what they call Cheese-colouring,
often giving it the name of _Spanish-Annatto_, and there is some of
it made, to very much resemble it, both in nature, and colour. But
true _Spanish-Annatto_ is much preferable; I have known an ounce of
it colour ten hundred weight of Cheese, of a much better colour than
any other ingredient would that I ever knew; I have known it formerly
sold in shops at three shillings, and four shillings _per_ ounce; the
great price it then brought at market, and getting very much into use,
induced the _American_ planters, at one time, to send a large quantity,
which so much over-stocked the market, and lowered the price, that it
was not worth their while to make it; and for that reason, very little
of the genuine sort has come to _England_ since; but the same materials
have come in flags, which come at a much lower price, though nearly as
dear in the end, being so much heavier, and the colour not going so far
as the _Spanish_, nor is the colour so exquisite or blooming as the
_Spanish_; that, giving the Cheese the bloom of native yellow Butter,
when made in the prime season of Spring. An ill opinion having been
formed of coloured Cheese, and by many said, that it is unwholesome;
in order to remove that prejudice, I will endeavour to describe its
nature. It is made from the seed of a plant, of the flowering kind,
much like to a balsam, the seed is so much like it, as scarce to be
distinguished from it; I have sowed it, but without effect, our climate
being too cold. I was sometime since enquiring of a _Jamaica_ Planter,
how the _Annatto_ was prepared for use; who said when the Seed was ripe
it was covered with a slimy or unctuous skin like as Linseed is, which
being steeped a little while in water, became loose from the Seed and
was rubbed off with a cloth or flannel, which being afterwards washed
with water, was sunk to the bottom; on pouring the water off, the
_Annatto_ was produced in a wet pulp, or paste, which being wrapped in
flags, was ready for Dyers use.

In the _Spanish Islands_, they dry it and make it up in balls for use,
and ’tis a principal ingredient in lacquering brass, _&c._ as well
as colouring Cheese. I am well convinced that in its pure state, it
is of a very rich fattening nature, and improves Cheese to a great
degree, in quality, as well as colour; as I never met with any Cheese
so exquisite, that had not been coloured with it, as I have of that
which hath. The way it is used in colouring Cheese, is, take a piece
of _Spanish-Annatto_, which appears in form of a stone, then take a
bowl of Milk, dip the _Annatto_ a little into it, then take a pebble,
or hard Rag-stone, on which rub the _Wet-Annatto_, washing off the
_Annatto_ into the bowl, till it becomes of a deep colour, then put
that into the tub, or pan of Milk you make Cheese of, (before you put
in the Runnet or Salt) in such quantity as will render the whole of a
pale Orange-colour, which will get deeper, or increase in colour after
the Cheese is made; one good property _Annatto_ partakes of, it neither
affects the Cheese in taste or smell. Cheese is often impregnated with
Sage, by bruising the leaves and mixing the juice with Milk, which
gives it a green colour, and an agreeable taste. Some use Parsley in
the same manner, but that is not so much esteemed for flavour as Sage,
Marigold-flowers are bruised and used the same way; these flowers
are reckoned of a very fattening nature, and good flavour, and
esteemed the most of any, and give the Cheese a colour nearly equal to
_Annatto_. Cochineal is also used by the curious, being of a fine pink
hue, and has a pretty effect, in the hand of an ingenious Dairy-woman,
in making figures of Flowers, Trees, _&c._ in Cheese.

Dairy-women who are fully of opinion, that no better method can be
used, than that which they apply, are not often very readily convinced,
that there are better methods of making Cheese than theirs. A Factor
who is a good judge of Cheese, sees a great variety in the quality of
Cheese, and altho’ most People like good Cheese, yet so easily is the
difference discerned by nice judges, who have frequent opportunities
of remarking it, that they can perceive a real and distinguishing
property, that causes a very different Idea in them, from what they
hear advanced by the makers. Such a dealer is very certain, that in a
large connexion of trade, he will find some very good judges, who know
how to prefer excellence in quality, and are well acquainted with the
perfections required in the article, and perhaps from their situation
in life, are enabled to get a much higher, than a common Market-price,
for a superior Article: Such a Person will have such goods, in what
place soever they can be met with, and knows also that in order to
procure them he must give a superior Price.

A Person who engages to supply such customers, as such there are in
perhaps every country, in a larger or lesser degree, must use his own
judgment, and not depend on the good opinion others may form of their
goods. He will find in a very large survey, amongst Dairys, in the
best country he travels, a very small proportion of excellent Dairys,
or such as will supply those particular customers, and when he meets
with them, is perhaps, obliged to deal them out very sparingly to the
different good customers, that may wish to have some particular nice,
and good Cheese for such of their Friends, who are likewise determined
to have the very best they can meet with. Very good second-rate
Cheese, is much more scarce than inferior, and the best, will still
find customers. Every dealer would be happy to find a large supply of
fine Cheese, every maker of Cheese would be glad to have his Dairy
meet with that preference. Some Dairy-folks will complain that there
is not proper encouragement given for making good Cheese; as Factors
give for all Dairys in a neighbourhood, nearly the same Price, though
some of these Dairys are not so good as others, by some shillings _per_
hundred: But then let these people remember, that ’tis themselves
only that sit in judgment in this case. Bring the makers of two
Dairys together, and you will hear each of them give the preference
to their own. The Factor must clear himself of this charge! For ’tis
of dangerous consequence, for a Factor to complain of any fault in
the Cheese to the maker, or not give it sufficient praise.--Perhaps
he will say to the Person, whose Dairy may appear the neatest, and
have had most care taken of it, and in the Eye of most people, had the
preference, your Cheese is extremely neat and good, is fat and mild,
and will please many of our best customers exceedingly, will even
stand in competition with _Gloucester_ and _Wiltshire_ Cheese, which
is always neat, well-handled, and mostly esteemed by genteel People,
your neighbour’s Cheese is not so mild or beautiful, but has many
good qualities, ’tis full flavoured, stout Cheese, such as is most in
demand, is bought by people who do not so much mind the beauty of it,
as being profitable Cheese to buy, that will spend well, or according
to the common Phrase, will eat Bread well, and though there may be a
few strong Cheeses amongst them, there are many customers wish to have
them so. If you go into a Fair, you will find some people looking for
handsome mild Cheese, but more buyers of stout, good spending Cheese,
of which they must be better judges, what suits their sale, than the
makers.--Certainly there are in most Countries, some few Dairys that
have all the good qualities; beautiful, fat, fine flavoured, _&c._
and these generally find their way to the best market. There is one
best way of doing every thing, and ’tis what in every way of life
is a cause of strife; a maxim I was taught in my youth, was, never
strive to be second best, some one must prevail, and they that do must
strive for it, the best way of doing a thing is as easy, when known, as
the second best. This emulation is what every dealer in Cheese would
wish to discover in the breast, and proceedings, of the Different
Dairy-folks in his walk, that he might be enabled to go to Market,
as one, who could lead and command both the opinion and interest of
the best customers: Such goods as would give that preference to him,
would of course give the command in price to those who supplied him;
for though the Cheese they now make, may at present support their own
good opinion, yet, when they come to find, that they have improved
in so great a degree, as to enable them to see excellence, where
they only saw usefulness, and blooming beauty, where only mediocrity
appeared; Ambition and Interest, their bosom friends, will point out
a new road to them, in which they will travel, not only as swift and
prosperous, as their rival neighbours, but will not leave them in an
easy and composed state, till they have out gone them. In this happy
track I confess I should be glad to meet many of my old friends and
neighbours, in whose service I have laboured many a long day; and
so far as my abilities will support me, should be glad to be their
conductor; but whether in my present pursuit, I may be so happy as to
shew them the right road, is very uncertain. If by opening their Ideas
afresh, shewing them where Improvements may be looked for, and giving
them some convincing circumstances, where such truths appear, they may
be led to look farther to find better, I shall hope they are in a fair
way to prevail. Some few circumstances they perhaps may expect, to
convince, and some fresh out-lines to extend the Ideas I have set on
float. I will give you in a few instances, the way I came first to be
moved in this pursuit.

The first that alarmed my Ideas, concerning the cause of sweet,
unsettled and ill-flavoured Cheese was, I was once going by a house,
I knew was notorious for as bad a Dairy as I ever met with, the
Dairy-woman saw me, and said, won’t you call and look at my Cheese, I
am sure ’tis as good as my neighbour T--s, which you have been buying,
I replied I fear not; come in then and see, she said; as soon as I came
into the Dairy-chamber, I saw, and told her it would not suit me; why
not, she replied, I am sure ’tis every drop New-Milk, and nobody can
take more pains with it, nor work harder at it than I do. On looking
to the farther side of the room, I perceived a Cheese that was very
blooming in appearance, handsome in shape, well-coated, firm, fat, and
much larger than the rest. I said, pray how came that Cheese there--I
should be glad to know the History of it; why truly said she ’tis a
strange one. I replied if you will make such Cheese as that, it would
be worth five shillings, or even ten shillings a hundred weight, more
than the rest; says she, one night when I had rendled my Milk, a person
came running to me, and said, neighbour T-- is groaning and you must
come immediately; I said to a raw wench I had to help me, now be sure
you don’t touch this Cheese till I come back, I will be sure to come
to you when I see how neighbour T-- is; but it happened she was worse
than I expected, and I could not leave her till after midnight. I
said, my Cheese will be spoiled, but the poor Woman shall not be lost
for a Cheese; when I came home I found it not so bad as I expected, put
it into the Vat in a hurry, saying, it may possibly make a Cheese that
will do for ourselves, but I little thought it would ever be a saleable
Cheese;--well now--said I, and is not this Cheese a proper lesson to
you? don’t you thereby plainly see that you have made the rest too
quick--why yes--said she, it might, if I had thought at all--but I
declare, I never once thought about it--Profound stupidity! thought I
to myself, and left her--however, this plainly convinced me that Cheese
in general was made too much in a hurry, and often when I came to a
Dairy where the same complaint prevailed, I told them this story, and
it frequently had the good effect, to produce good Cheese in the lieu
of bad, by giving more time to the Milk in earning.

To corroborate with this story also, my own opinion, that good Cheese
may be made by a skilful Dairy-woman in any place, or on any land;
there now lives in the same farm, where this old woman did, a person
who makes, without exception, as good a Dairy of Cheese, in every
point, as I ever met with in any country; I have had this Dairy, at
a Fair at a distance for many years, and two or three people were
generally at strife to have it, and it commonly happen’d that it was
made a point of by Buyers, that if I would let them have that Dairy,
they would buy their whole quantity of me, so that it generally was the
cause of my selling three or four other Dairys along with it. Next,
to shew that there are many Dairy-women do not make so much Cheese
from the same Milk, or near it, as they might, or ought to do; on the
evening of a very hot day, I went through a Farm-yard, and was much
pleased to see as fine a Dairy of twenty Cows as I had seen for a long
time, on going into the Dairy-chamber, to my great surprize, I found a
poor parcel of very lean, hungry looked, ill shaped, bad tasted, hove,
and Whey-spring Cheese,--I said to the Dairy-woman, certainly this is
not all the Cheese you have made from the fine Dairy of Cattle I saw
in your yard! It really is, said she, except the few that are not come
out of the Dairy. I have been so ill for the last two or three months,
I could not possibly be amongst it, and I find my maids know very
little of the matter. It is a poor parcel, and I am ashamed to see it;
I replied your servant takes a wrong method in making Cheese; I will
engage to tell you how you shall make two Cheeses where you now make
one, or one Cheese as large again; that difference, struck her much;
if you will she said, I will try it, and this very evening--Then, said
I,--as the weather is hot, take three or four quarts of fresh spring
Water, or in such quantity till you find your Milk is what you may
properly call Milk-warm, then, put two or three handfuls of Salt into
it,--after that put your Runnet into it, and let it stand an hour and
half before you stir it, if ’tis two hours it will be better, and you
will be sure to have more Cheese, in that time, the Curd will incline
to sink easily to the bottom of your Tub, then collect and gather your
Curd,--let it stand one quarter of a hour to settle, then Vat it, and
put it into your Press; let it stand in the Press two or three meals,
turning it in the Press once between the first meals, and at each meal
after--she followed my advice precisely, the Milk being at rest before
I left the house. Some time after, I enquired of her how my advice
succeeded; she said quite well, and I am convinced we had not made half
the Cheese we ought to have done. But observed, their Pigs had been
found to thrive in a surprizing manner, and well they might, after
having had more than half the produce of the Dairy.

I once met with a young Dairy-woman at a Fair; who had a lot of
Cheese unsold, after almost every Dairy in the Yard it stood in was
disposed of; she asked me to buy her Cheese, having bought some
adjoining Dairys; I objected, saying I do not like it, she seemed
rather surpriz’d, saying, I am sure ’tis made of as good Milk and as
well took care of as any of my neighbours that you have bought, I told
her the method she took in making the Cheese was wrong, she seemed
quite desirous to improve it if she knew how. I desired her to follow
the method described above, exactly, which she promised to do, but
observed it was so contrary to what she had ever heard of, she should
be surprized if it made good Cheese. I said the Cheese you have here
is very bad, the way to make good Cheese must be contrary to that
in which this was made, for the like reason as when a person is in
a burning fever, cooling medicines are applied to restore him; when
very chill, a warming remedy will have effect--she wish’d to know what
were the faults of her Cheese; I told her it was very loose, sweet,
or ill-tasted; that rather displeased her, and she seemed to mistrust
my knowing any thing of the matter--saying--it is not sweet--how
can you possibly know that never tasted it, I told her Cheese of
that countenance always was sweet. I put my taster into one and gave
it her to taste, she acknowledged it was very rank, but wondered
how I could know it was so--I perceived the Cheese of an unsettled
nature, that I had not a doubt the Milk had been carried in Churns
or Barrels, I said I imagine your Dairy-ground is some distance from
your House, do you milk your Cows in the field or drive them home, she
said sometimes the latter, but generally the former, and brought the
Milk home on Horse-back. I told her how difficult it was to make good
Cheese of Milk carried in that way; she said I find you know where I
live, I replied I don’t know so much as the County you live in, she
seemed quite astonish’d; I saw a husky dry coated Cheese on the top
of one of the heaps, that had dry cracks in it; I said, I suppose you
remember how that Cheese was made; she answered in the affirmative,
when you made that Cheese, I said, you had reserved some Curd from
the meal before, and put into the other Curd, next meal, which having
been rendled too hot would not join together, as I will shew you by
the different Curds in the Cheese, which I did in my taster, the
white looking Curd being the old Curd which caused the cracks, and
the yellow the New-Milk, (and you may always observe a mixture of
that kind where Curd is kept from the last meal, appearing marbled
and cutting chiselly)--She acknowledged that Cheese was made in the
manner I described, seemed very thankful for my advice, and pursued
it very nearly the next Summer, when she produced at the same Fair
the following Year a Dairy of Cheese with very few faults; I pointed
them out to her, told her how to remedy them, as in the rules before
described; she thanked me, and the next Year with great pleasure shewed
me an exceeding good parcel of Cheese.--A near relation of mine, who
kept a Butter Dairy, was desirous of making Cheese, and said to me,
I am entirely ignorant how to proceed, but if you will point out the
right method, I will exactly follow it, I gave her the same direction
as to the former Dairy-woman, she followed it, and I am certain no one
can make nicer, or fatter well tasted Cheese than she did, being one
Day saying how good her Cheese proved, observed she had one Cheese,
then cut, that was jointed and blue-pared, and wish’d to know the cause
of it; I examined it, and found it must be caused by slip-curd; she
said she never altered, or shortened the Time given for the coming of
the Milk after it was rendled; on ruminating the cause, I said, do you
put your bowl in the Tub when the Runnet is in? She replied always; do
you ever find any difference in the Curd under the Bowl from the rest,
on removing the Bowl?--Sometimes I perceive the Curd under the Bowl
of a smooth slippery nature, and when I have tried to get it solid, I
never could, it always slipt through my fingers, and some of it would
swim in the Whey when the other was solid, which I always took care
to break as small as flour, among the other Curd--I said is the Bowl
being there of any use? She did not know that it was; she took it away
and had no jointed Cheese after, in her Dairy; which plainly convinced
me that the Air under the Bowl prevented the Curd from coming in the
same Time as the rest, and that the small quantity of slip-curd under
it, was the sole cause of the joints that appeared, for there was not
an Eye in the Cheese, owing to its being broke so small, which if any
of the slip-curd had been left in bits of any size, would have caused
Eyes larger or smaller in the Cheese, but now it dissolved in the
form, and manner before described, in jointed Cheese; it is a general
practice with Dairy-women to put the Bowl in the Milk when the Runnet
is put in, and leave it in till the Cheese is come; I have frequently
asked the reason for it, and the general answer was, that by taking
the Bowl out, they might know when the Cheese was come; which will be
much better known by putting the Bowl the contrary way, or the hollow
part upwards instead of being downwards, for there is often slip-curd
collects under the Bowl when put downwards and that makes your Cheese
Whey spring, or Eyey, and for that reason the Bowl had much better
not be put in at all, especially in Cheese that is sunk, and not
broke, as then the slip-curd is sure to cause Whey springs.--Another
relation, being pleased with her Sister succeeding so well, followed
exactly the same method, having wrote down every particular, and her
Cheese was remarkably fine and good. These, and such like instances
convince me that good Cheese may be made by rule, or regular method, on
any Land, providing nothing very singular prevents, as from noxious
weeds, plants, &c. or distempered Cattle. It is often observed poor
Land makes the best Cheese; to those who are fond of mild Cheese, it
very often does, the Milk being weaker or thinner, is sooner collected
into Curd, than rich Milk, by which means it is often completely fit
to sink or gather sooner, and has many chances of making good Cheese
by that means, or in the same time allowed, than from better Milk,
which will not become good Curd in the same time that is given for the
weaker Milk; for if the Curd is not solid and good, no art can make
good Cheese of it. But, if rich pasture, good feeding Land, being old
Turf, has proper time given it to make good Curd, and the Cheese is
well taken care of after, I always find the richer Grass makes the best
Cheese and more of it. To confirm my Opinion, that breaking Cheese in
the Curd is a needless and exceeding wasteful method; being lately at a
friend’s house who keeps a few Cows only to make Butter and Cheese for
their own use, and that of a few friends, the Gentlewoman said to me, I
could wish to know the best method of making fine Cheese, (having met
with such at my relations, before mentioned) and desired my directions;
and said their Cheese was apt to be a good while in coming when in the
Tub, their pasture being rich old Turf. I told them to give it full two
hours, recommended putting salt in the Milk as before prescribed, which
was done, and to sink the Curd instead of breaking it; after having a
long knife made from a lath, cut the Curd from top to bottom, crossing
it many times, by which means the Whey separates readily, then get a
sieve and there with you will press down the Curd with great ease.
Having settled the Curd well, and let it stand a quarter of an hour to
drain, having laded all the Whey out, it became quite solid--then the
Dairy-maid cut it in slices and work’d it into the Vat, without ever
breaking the Curd at all; with very little trouble, and in a short time
she made a complete handsome Cheese; full one third part larger than
any they had before produced from the same Cows, and continued so to do
in succeeding days, the Whey being quite green, which they could never
bring it to be, when broke and gathered in the Tub; and broke in the
Vat afterward, which method certainly wastes a great deal of Cheese and
much impoverishes it by squeezing the fat out in breaking.

A friendly correspondent, being a considerable dealer in Cheese,
knowing of my intended publication, is so kind as to favour me with his
sentiments on some particulars; which, as some of them coincide with my
own already described, and one in particular, promises great utility
to very small Dairys, and will be a considerable means to prevent
sour Cheese, by pointing out a method to preserve the Curd without
hazard, with his permission I lay it before my readers. “I have some
years been trying to find out the reason why Cheese frequently looks
of a grey dirty appearance, and which is always attended with a strong
disagreeable taste, and from enquiries and observations I have made,
I am clearly convinced it is owing to the Runnet being kept too long,
and not being sweet when put into the Milk. It is often the case in
small Dairys in order to make the Cheese of a tolerable full size, to
make it but once a day, and in hot Weather it is almost impossible to
prevent one meal being sour, which must inevitably spoil the Cheese.
I beg leave to inform you of a method practised with good success.
A friend of mine who was a Farmer’s Daughter, and had been used to
a Dairy, marrying a person of a different profession, they kept one
Cow to give Milk for the family, which being small she could not use
all the Milk; she then tried to make Cheese of the surplus, and made
tolerable sized Cheeses, perhaps seven or eight pounds each, in the
following manner; when the weather was warm, she put Runnet to the Milk
as oft as she found it necessary, once or twice a day, while it was
sweet; having separated the Curd from the Whey, she put the Curd into a
broad shallow Tub, just covering it with cold water, and shifting the
water two or three times a day as she thought necessary, and thus kept
the different parcels of Curd, till she had enough to fill her Vat, by
which means, she made exceeding good Cheese. Some good Dairy-women, I
think often err in the manner of breaking their Curd; tho’ they make
good Cheese, they might make better and more of it, if they did not
squeeze out so much of the fat in breaking; the Whey that first runs
from the Curd is always the thinnest, and was that thin part first
separated, before the Curd was much broke, it would certainly leave
the Cream in the Cheese, which would but little of it squeeze out in
putting in the Vat, but when it is broke so very small amongst the Whey
the rich parts are squeezed amongst the thin Whey and carried away
with it. I know an instance or two myself, of persons who I firmly
believe made their Cheese of real New-Milk, yet broke their Curd so
much that their Cheese was not so good as I have had two-meal Cheese. I
think the method used in _Norfolk_ and _Suffolk_ to separate the Whey
from the Curd, is much preferable to that used in _Warwickshire_, or
_Leicestershire_; when they think the Milk is sufficiently curdled,
they lay a strainer into a basket (made for the purpose,) which they
put the Curd into and let it stand to drain for a time, before they
break the Curd.” In regard to my friend’s opinion concerning what he
calls grey, dirty looking Cheese, ’tis often caused by foul Runnet, but
I am of opinion it more often happens when Cows have been drenched,
either for the yellows or other complaints; and it will look of that
countenance and get insipid, or ill tasted when much frozen, as I have
more than once had Cheese in my own possession turn of that dark putrid
colour after being much froze, that I knew was not so before it was
affected by frost.

Being lately in company with a Dairy-man at a distance, talking about
Cheese-making, he said he never used a Cheese press, and said that his
Cheese got hard as soon, and kept as well as those that used a Press,
the method he used is, to make the Cheese in a hoop (being chiefly
thickish skim Cheese, tho’ he said he often made New-Milk Cheese in
the same way) that was open at top and bottom, which being filled
with Curd, and well squeezed into it, was then set upon a board that
had holes bored in it, the hoop also being bored and cover’d with a
board which was bored also, putting a moderate weight upon the board
to settle the Cheese; turning it upside down, twice a day till it got
stiff, and it answered very well. When Curd is firm, it will settle and
get hard with very little crushing, it is the slip-Curd that is in it,
that makes it require so much pressing to settle it, this method will
be very useful in very small Dairys that have no Press.

Clover, or other artificial Grass, which generally contains more Air
than common Grass, requires full time in bringing the Cheese; in its
first operation, it should not be exposed to too much heat, immediately
after it is made, as the greater the quantity of Air that remains in
the Cheese, the more effect heat will have upon it, by causing it to
heave, or split when the Air becomes rarified. Cheese made from Clover
is rather more difficult to make, to even the best of Dairy-women, but
I have seen very good sound Dairys of stout, full flavour’d Cheese
made from Clover, especially when a good deal of time is allowed to
bring the Cheese, and care is taken not to let it lye too hot, after
it begins to get dry. It is always hurtful to Cheese to lye too near
tiles in hot weather. Dairys are subject to damage by noxious, or
poisonous plants, roots, or trees: Where Cows are fed in pastures much
addicted to wild-garlick, or cow-garlick, ramsons, or wild chives, I
have often perceived the rank taste of the Herb in the Cheese. Many
people are at a fault to know the cause of bitter Cheese; which I have
often observed is most prevalent from poor, or moderate light Land, and
have frequently taken notice that where Cheese is bitter, their pasture
is much addicted to black plantain, ribbed Grass, or cock plant, may
weed, dandelion, especially the rough leaved sort; centaury--arsmart
or lakeweed, tansey, wormwood, meadow sweet, &c.--I take yarrow to
be an ill favoured Plant for Cheese, where it prevails much in Land,
being of a very faint nature, tho’ Sheep are said to be very fond of
it,--Hemlock--hen-bane--nightshade, cow-bane, cow-weed, water-wort,
kex, drop-wort, yew-tree, box, and most other ever-greens certainly
are noxious and very hurtful.[5] I have often observed in riding
thro’ Dairy-farms, how little attention is paid to pasturage, Farmers
frequently suffering many sorts of known noxious Plants or Weeds to
flourish in them, without any concern to extirpate or cast them out, or
of having the least thought of encouraging, or propogating such as are
salutary or cheering to Cattle; I have often heard the remark made by
Farmers that there is an instinct in Cattle that directs them to avoid
noxious Plants, and even directs nature to apply many as remedies in
various complaints; we often read of wild Beasts, Serpents, _&c._ that
are governed by such instinct.--But it often happens that in very dry
seasons, pastures are so very short that Cattle are obliged to eat any
thing that is green to keep them alive, and ’tis well known they often
do clear up every thing before them, and many sorts of Plants that
they will not touch at other times; I have often observed that in such
seasons, Cattle are very much subject to violent disorders; I have
known many die, without the owners, or cow-leech being at all able to
account for the cause; and frequently taken notice that Cattle dying
so suddenly are much subject to swell greatly, and often in the same
Dairy that many have died apparently from the same cause, and that such
complaints are most prevalent in the Months of _July_ and _August_,
when poisonous Plants are in full vigour; I remember one Person who
had lost several Cows, who was a judicious person in Farming affairs,
observe, that undigested Plants were found in their Stomachs, or Maws
when opened, although they had not eat any vegetable food for two or
three days, which made him suspect they were poisonous, and ’tis very
natural to form such an Idea.

There is no branch in Husbandry seems of more importance, or gives
a larger field for improvement than the conducting and managing of
Dairy-Farms; as a great share of the health, as well as the lives of
the human species, are in a considerable degree dependent, on the
health and good condition of Milch Cows. Milk being a vegetable juice,
or that yields a nourishment partly vegetable and partly animalized,
partaking more or less, of the good or bad qualities of Plants on which
the Cow feeds--Milk, in its produce of Cream, Butter, Cheese and many
of our luxuries, is a constituent part of our daily food, through every
stage of Life, consequently great care ought to be taken, with respect
to the food of Animals, who furnish us with so great, and necessary a
part of our sustenance; I have always thought some knowledge in the use
of Plants, a very agreeable amusement, and it would certainly have been
much more my study, had I thought of ever having such an opportunity of
making it useful. Such as have fallen under my knowledge I have here
endeavoured to describe, in which I acknowledge to have received much
help from a late ingenious publication of DR. WITHERING on _Botany_,
(being the first I ever met with in English after the Linnæan System,)
which I think a work of great merit. As the Dairy-man, or Farmer,
becomes more informed of the nature of noxious Plants, he will
surely think it worth his while to try to get rid of them, by rooting
them out; and as it is well known that Cows are very much subject to
scowring, and flatulent or windy disorders, it may be very well worth
his while to sow or plant in his pastures and hedges, such herbs in
proper quantities as are found to be the best remedies for these and
such other complaints which Cattle are most incident to. Among many
that might be mentioned the following herbs are very salutary, (and if
there is such an instinct in Cattle as some suppose, they will know
how to cull the best,) lovage, agrimony, chervil, carraway, cummin,
mint, bazil, hyssop, rue, angelica, pepper-mint, penny-royal, thyme,
marjoram, _&c._ I should think a very proper time to sow, or plant
them, would be when you set, or plant hedges, or when plashed, or the
banks fresh made up, or in pastures where Ant-hills are dug up and
carried away, to sow them in the places they are dug from; It must
certainly be an improvement of the first kind, to clear a Farm of all
sorts of noxious and poisonous Plants and Weeds, and stocking them
with such as are healthful salutary and medicinal.--Trefoil & white
Clover are esteemed exceeding good Grasses for producing Milk. But the
highest encomium is given to Saintfoin Grass, as being superior to any
other.--An _Essex_ Farmer who is a correspondent in the _Bath_ Society
for promoting Agriculture, thus describes it; “As the roots strike deep
in our chalky soil, this plant is not liable to be so much injured
by drought as other Grasses whose fibres shoot horizontally and lie
near the surface, the quantity of Hay produced is greater, and better
in quality than any other, but there is one advantage attends this
Grass, which renders it superior to any, and that arises from feeding
it with Milch Cows, the prodigious increase of Milk which it makes is
astonishing, being near double that produced by any other food. The
Milk is also better and yields more Cream than any other; I give you
this information from my own observation, confirmed by long experience,
and if Farmers would make trial they would find their account in it far
more than they expect.”

It is a pretty general opinion, that Saintfoin thrives only on
up-lands, that lie near a rock, lime-stone, chalk or strong gravel; the
reason given is, the roots strike so deep in the Earth, that unless it
meets a check it seldom flourishes. That such Land, being rocky, or
very shallow hungry soil that will scarce bear any other sorts of Grass
does produce great crops of Saintfoin, I have many times observed in
different Counties; but as I meet with various Authors who say, that
notwithstanding that advantage there is in it, preferable to any other
Grass, yet it always thrives best in a rich good soil, which makes me
imagine it has seldom had a fair trial, and if the advantage as a Dairy
Grass is so great, it is highly worth the Dairy-man’s notice.

We find many Farmers very industrious to improve their breed of Cattle,
and set much store on blood and fashion. The Dairy-man’s chief concern
should be to have Cows with good Bags, or Udders; that yield a quantity
of Milk; and it is well known, by persons who keep but one or two
Cows, that there is a material difference in the richness of Milk in
Cows, and that when they set up the Milk of different Cows, they find,
one shall yield a much larger quantity of Cream than another; and many
are known not only to yield more Milk, but even much better than the
Cow which gives less; this is an useful remark to a Dairy-man as the
quantity of rich Milk is the support of his undertaking, and must in
the end pay more than the fine form of Cattle, which may be of more
consequence to the feeding Grazier; and great care should be taken that
the Cows are Milked clean, as many good Cows are spoiled by suffering
Milk to remain in the Udder; which will cause the Cow daily to give
less and less, till at length she will become dry before the proper
time, and will be very apt to give but little Milk the next season. It
is observed in Fairs, that the people from _Wiltshire_ and other Dairy
Counties, who buy Cows, always make a large bag in a Milking Cow, their
first object, and those that buy Cattle for feeding pay very little
regard to it, prefering a good carcase; as Dairy-men are generally
the breeders of Calves, it should be their first object, to breed from
Cows, which produce the best and largest quantity of Milk, and supply
their own Dairy with that breed. I have often heard Dairy-men remark,
that Cows are apt to give more Milk on the land they are bred upon,
than others who come from a distant soil. I would always recommend to
every Dairy-man, wherever it is in his power, to convey running streams
into his Dairy-ground,--to encourage his Cows to frequent scowers in
Brooks, or running Streams; Cows certainly like clear Water best, and
it always produces most Milk; and keeping them cool, the Milk is much
easier made into Cheese, or Butter. When Cheese goes from the Press,
let it be kept in as warm a state as you can, till it has had a sweat,
or is got pretty regularly dry, and stiffish: It is warmth that makes
Cheese ripe, improves the colour, and causes Cheese to cut flakey, the
surest sign of excellent quality; which is very clear to those who know
the great difference there is in Cheese that has gone by Sea in the
Summer-time to _London_, or any distant Port on our Coast, having been
thoroughly heated on Ship-board, by the heat of the Season, and such
large quantities being in the same apartment. I dare say any Person who
has eat Cheese in the finest Dairys in _Cheshire_, and also in a Tavern
in _London_, when the same sort of Cheese has undergone the heat of
a Ship, and afterwards been laid in a Wine-cellar to cool gradually,
and make it Mellow, (which is allowed to be the best situation for
finishing Cheese, it not being exposed to harsh Winds, or chilling
Air,) such Person must allow the Warmth it has received, improves the
flavor and richness of the Cheese to a superlative degree. I would
recommend, where it can be avoided, that hard Cheese is not kept in
the same Room with the soft, as a dampness that arises from the new
moist Cheese, is a detriment to the improving state the hard Cheese
is getting into, making it very apt to chill, and get thick-coated,
and often spotted; in some measure there is an analogy with the fine
flavoured Fruit, this being the Season that Cheese may be supposed to
come to its flavor, and the foul damp that falls from the exhalation
of the soft Cheese greatly retards it, and being deprived of a chearing
Warmth, will never become excellent. Cheese never tastes agreeably
till it has had a sweat, such as is always kept in a cold state eats
chill, flat-tasted and insipid; a south aspect, or a Room over a
Kitchen-fire is much best, till Cheese is got tollerably hard and had
a sweat; a cool shady Room, or even a Plaster-floor is best after it
has had a sweat, till such Time as the Weather gets too cool. Cheese
very seldom heaves or gets puffy after it has had a sweat and got cool
again; the fat that melts with heat, closes the pores of Cheese made
open by harsh Air, and keeps it mellow afterwards. The sweat of Cheese
should not be rubbed off, or scraped off, unless it has sweat to a
violent degree, as it keeps the Cheese mellow and always improves the
flavour. To have every excellence it must have every advantage.--In
_Wilts_, _Gloucestershire_, and some part of _Warwickshire_, most
people wash their Cheese, putting it in a little warm Water or Whey
to soften the swarthy-coat occasioned by the Cheese-cloth, or not
being rubbed when it begins to get coated; then they rub it off with a
Brush, and afterward lay it to dry, or sweat before it is laid in the
cooler apartment; many prefer rubbing it with a hair-cloth, beginning
with it when Cheese is fit to handle, and not wash it. If Cheese is
designed for going by Sea, or for speedy consumption, I think washing
is preferable, care being taken not to send it off too soft, as that
exposes it to crack, then the Fly takes it, and Maggots breeding in
it damages your Cheese. When Cheese is designed to be kept long in
the Dairy, if kept well cleaned, I prefer the other method, as the
coat preserves it, keeps it mellow and improves the Flavor. Frost is
very detrimental to Cheese if permitted to get into it, especially,
soft young Cheese; care should be taken to keep the Windows close in
hard frosty Weather; many will cover it with (and even lay it in)
Peas-straw in severe Seasons. I have known all the good qualities of
Cheese annihilated or taken away, by being Frost-bitten when Young;
it is apt to turn black as if made with sooty Milk, and not have the
least taste of Salt, or any relish remain. It is a very common method
to scald Cheese, either in the Curd, or in the Cheese; the former I
quite disapprove, the design being only to settle the Curd which has
not had Time given it to sink solid in the Tub, which if done, will
want no scalding; boiling Water, or boiling Whey poured upon it will
set the Curd in some degree, and fix it hard, but then it always leaves
it Tough and Horny-coated, if it is scalded to any great degree; more
time taken in bringing the Curd, and having the Milk of a proper
warmth, will render this whole proceeding quite needless. People are
only seeking a remedy for a fault which they had no sort of occasion to
have been troubled with. Scalding Cheese after it has been in the Press
is of some advantage to Cheese that is to go by Sea, that, only being
to set the coat and toughen it, is not so much exposed to bruising, and
the heat of the Ship recovers it again to its proper state by removing
that toughness which scalding gave it; but Cheese for Country Trade,
is hurt by scalding, making it Tough and Horny-coated. If Cheese gets
too hard that has been scalded, the best way to recover it, is to lay
it in a heap, four, five, or six Cheeses high, in a cool room, stirring
and removing every Cheese once in two or three Days, till it is got
mellow. In many Counties, as _Lincoln_, _Huntington_, _Bedford_, _&c._
People take very great pains to make bad Cheese, if a good Dairy-woman
happens to come amongst them that sells Cheese for a much greater Price
than they can, yet they will follow their own method; perhaps, some few
of them at least, when they come to see Dairying plainly delineated,
may have some inclination to alter their Plan, unless they prefer bad
Cheese to good.

Many may wish to know what is a proper Size for Cheese Vats for Trade.
For Cheese of the _Gloucester_ make, we reckon that Vats--15 Inches
Wide by 2¼ Inches Deep to make Cheese, Eleven to the Hundred Weight.

  15½ Inches by 2½ to make Tens.
  16  Inches by 2½ to make Nines.
  16½ Inches by 2½ to make Eights.
  16½ Inches by 2¾ to make Sevens, &c.

Since writing the account of the Maw-skin, I have heard of a Plant
called the Runnet-Plant; it is the first Time I ever heard the Name
of it or the least hint concerning it. I am informed the _Jews_ make
all their Cheese with it; their Law not permitting them to mingle Meat
with Milk, which term they apply to making Cheese with Maw-skin, I have
frequently seen _Jew_ Cheese, but never saw any that I thought good
or tollerably so, makes me imagine it is the necessity of principle
only, that promotes its Use, but as I am an entire Stranger to the
process, shall be greatly obliged to any one who will favour me with
any particulars concerning it, with its qualities and manner of Use.[6]

I am favour’d with a Letter from a Friend whose veracity I can depend
on, acquainting me of another species of Runnet-plant, imagining my
former information was not right, and that the Dairy-plant was of a
different kind to that I had described--sending at the same time some
plants, for my inspection--called spear-grass, and also the method
of using it, as practised by a very good Dairy-woman in the County
of _Derby_ for many Years, whose Dairy was in the highest credit in
the neighbourhood, where she lived, hoping the Public might receive
benefit by the publication of it, the receipt is as follows.--Take
Spear-grass, and as much cold water as will cover the Grass, boil it
over a slow Fire for an hour, put to it salt in proportion, of half a
peck to six gallons of Liquor, then cover it up till cold, then strain
it and add three Maw-skins to each gallon, let it stand nine or ten
days, then bottle it, use a table spoonful for a Cheese of fifteen or
sixteen pounds; but more or less may be used at discretion. From this
receipt a very useful remark may be made: I have frequently enquired of
Dairy-women who made their Runnet for keeping, what quantity of Skin
they us’d, and have generally understood it to be about two Skins to
a gallon of Water, but I have always thought that must be too little,
here we find three Skins is recommended, even added to the decoction
of Spear-grass, which must certainly be a powerful help to the Runnet;
’tis observ’d also in the receipt, that a table spoon-full may be used
for a Cheese of fifteen or sixteen pounds, which I imagine must be as
much as twelve or fourteen Cows Milk; if even two or three spoon-fulls
will do for that quantity of Milk it must be of a very powerful
fermenting quality, and leads me to imagine that Runnet in general, is
certainly made too weak; and that if by the above method, or by the
addition of spices as recommended by _Mr. Hazard_, a much stronger
Runnet is made; it must greatly quicken the coagulation and be a means
of bringing the Cheese properly, in shorter time than that in present
use, and might probably be sufficient if the Milk stand an hour, or at
most an hour and half, which would fully reconcile my plan of sinking
Cheese to those who may think the only difficulty attending it, is
requiring too much time.

Spear-grass is a very common plant, grows chiefly on moist land, or
by pit sides, often in lanes, it is an upright stem, inclin’d to a
redish brown, mixt with green, the leaves are spear-shaped growing up
the stalk, a bright yellow flower with five petals, of the crow foot
form, blossoms in _May_ and _June_; this is doubtless a good plant for
improving the Runnet, it being of a hot nature, and having been used
so many Years with good success is a great recommendation--but this
cannot be the plant before described to me, and which I have found
in different Authors, called yellow ladies bed-straw, goose-grass or
Cheese Renning, nor does the Runnet made with it answer to the ends
proposed in making _Jew_ Cheese.

I should imagine the best time to collect the Spear-grass for making
Runnet, must be when it is in full Flower, which may be very apt to
help the colour as well as give firmness to the Cheese. I have not a
doubt but Runnet made with this plant, in the manner above described,
will be a considerable improvement in Cheese-making, and should be glad
to hear of its having a fair trial, it appears to me to be the most
likely thing to correct the mischief caused by Slip-curd.

Having now gone through the design of the work, and laid down such
observations on the principal concerns of Dairying, so far as relates
to Cheese-making, as occur to my remembrance, I take my leave of it,
hoping in general it will be found useful and expedient, and before
I conclude, earnestly recommend it to such Dairy-women who find any
difficulty in their proceedings in the business of Cheese-making, or
wish to improve their make of Cheese, that they will, well weigh every
part of the subject, and make trial of the whole process, as stated in
its different parts. As I am well convinced, by repeated trials that
if the plan I have laid down is observed with care, it will not fail
to make good Cheese. And though it may be objected by many, the length
of time of the Milk standing for Curd, yet so complete will the state
of the Curd be, that you will often times more than save that time in
crushing, as it will be finished in half the time, that bad Curd will
take, and by the extra weight of Cheese, that time will give, will
at length repay all your trouble; I well know, many Dairy-women are
partial to some particular method, or nostrum of their own, or their
mothers, or neighbour such a one who was a famous Dairy-woman, as being
preferable to all others, in which they often fail of success, in
some respect by having omitted to observe the exact minutia of their
practice. As a very small omission, in time, or method, sometimes
leads them into a labyrinth, which they very rarely ever get out of,
and causes them more vexation and perplexity, than if they had never
known any thing about it. Or, if their’s be a good method and very
practicable, perhaps it is possible there may be a better, or easier
means of proceeding, that will render their Plan quite needless.

I hope that those who wish to improve from my instructions, will give
it a fair Trial, if any at all; they need not say they are left in the
Dark in any part of it, as every particular is made plain and most of
them repeated, as precept upon precept, and line upon line. Let them
be particular however in the main concerns, such as the proper warmth
of the Milk, the goodness, and use of the Maw-skin, to give it Time
enough in the Tub, or Cheese-pan, to keep the Cheese warm when young,
and cool afterwards; then I think they will scarce fail of making good
Cheese. If they mean to excel, and make fine Cheese--and why not?--Then
I refer them to the more minute Observations of the Work, and I wish
and hope, that they will find their Pains well bestowed, and afford
them both Comfort and Profit. I doubt not but methods used in different
Counties vary a good deal. Some perhaps may be pointed out that are
preferable to some of mine, and if any Person will be kind enough to
point them out to me, or shew me where any thing has been omitted, or
Error committed, if another Edition should be called for, I shall very
willingly communicate them to the Public.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

ON BUTTER.


Butter is an Article in very general use, and numerous are the people
employed in making it; and is in great esteem; from observations I have
made, it admits of very little variation in the method of preparing,
which methods are so generally known, require very little commentary
upon them; I profess not to understand them, and therefore shall say
very little about it. What little I have remarked in conversing with
Dairy-women, is, that care should be taken to set up your Milk when
it is of a proper warmth--Milk-warm is the best, regulated the same
as for rendling Cheese, applying a little cold Water if too hot, and
either warm Water or Milk if too cold; many think Water best, saying,
it will throw up Cream sooner; to take care the Utensils it is set up
in, are exceeding clean--the utility of which I think is clearly made
appear by observing the effect of a contrary remark in making Whey
Butter.--Indolence, finds out many ways which Industry never thought
of.--Some Butter-Women, whose care is, more, to make a large quantity,
than regard the quality, or flavour of Butter, will tell you, that sour
Whey, yields more Cream than sweet, and it immediately turns sour, by
putting it into the Pans you poured the last meal’s Whey from, without
washing them. But in making good Butter, great care must be taken to
prevent the Cream’s being sour, or your Butter will be ill flavoured,
and will keep good but a very little time--That lead Pans are preferred
to every thing, in throwing up, or rising the Cream from Milk. Not to
let the Milk stand too long before it is skimmed, especially in hot
weather.--If it must stand two meals, it had better be skimmed twice,
than to let it stand the whole time for one skimming, as the Milk often
turns sour before the expiration of two meals; and if the last meal
should change, you may then be enabled to keep all the sweet Cream by
itself.--The less time the Cream stands before it is churned, the
finer flavoured and sweeter your Butter will be.

Nothing is more commendable in a Dairy-maid than cleanliness,
nor will any thing cause them to be more esteemed; every one who
perceives extream neatness in a Dairy, cannot help wishing to purchase
either Butter or Cheese from so clean and neat a place, and would
gladly give a higher price, rather than be exposed to the chance of
sluttish nastiness, too common in many Dairys. It is remarked by many
Travellers, that in the _Isle_ of _Wight_, nothing is more pleasing
than to see the exceeding neatness of their Dairys; it very rarely goes
unnoticed, and to a delicate taste, scarce any thing affords greater
pleasure.

As Butter is become a very considerable Article of Trade, it is highly
proper every means should be rendered to make it as complete and
perfect as possible; it is very different in regard to purchasers of
large quantities of Butter, who must take lots as they happen, and in
which very often a considerable part of them are very inferior to what
they ought to be, and to buyers of fresh Butter in Markets; who can see
and taste it before they buy, which is a caution to the makers to have
it well made, knowing it will be inspected before sold, those who put
it into Casks or Firkins, for distant sale, are apt not to be so very
careful about it. I have heard frequent enquiry by Cheese-mongers, or
dealers in Butter, what is the cause of Salt Butter being so subject to
get rank, strong tasted, or rancid, or what some people call a fishy
taste, which is a very great detriment to dealers in Butter, and the
cause of the complaint much wants to be known; being well acquainted
that the complaint is very frequent, has often led me to enquire into
the cause when an opportunity has offered, being lately conversing
with a person on the subject, he said it was very common in _Suffolk_
& _Yorkshire_, to heat the Milk before it was set up for Cream, which
is done in order to increase the quantity of Cream. It is well known
that every fat substance that is heated, will in course of time turn
rancid, or reezy, that when Butter, of the last year, or a year old, is
in the Cask through the Summer, the heat will affect it, and so far
as the heat gets into it, will reeze or become of a tallowy nature,
fat Bacon will reeze so far as the fat melts; and the heating of Milk
must certainly alter the nature of it, and in course of time will cause
the Butter to turn rancid, and ill tasted. I have heard it observed by
a person who is used to buy fresh Butter that was made of heated, or
clouted Cream, (which is a method much used in some parts of the South
of England) that it is very apt to get strong and will keep good but
a very little time. So that from all remarks I have been capable of
making, it seems clear to me that the badness or foulness of Butter, is
chiefly owing to the Milk being heated, and is a hint worth the enquiry
of the public, especially large dealers in Butter, in order that some
method may be taken to prevent an evil that is become so very prevalent.

A friend who has been much used to Dairying, lately communicated to me
a method to give Winter made Butter, which is often made from Fodder,
either Hay or Straw, the countenance and relish of Summer Butter,
made in the prime of the Season; which is done by taking the juice of
carrots, being bruised, or pounded to a pulp & then press’d or squeezed
out, putting it into the Cream before Churn’d. And also, a method to
take off the disagreeable taste of Butter made from Turnips, viz. let
your Cream be warmed and poured into a Tub or Pail of cold Water, then
skim the Cream off the Water, which will rise to the top, the same
as in Milk, and by this means leave the foul taste behind it in the
Water, this last method will much improve Whey Butter, taking off the
disagreeable sourness that often attends it, and by adding the juice of
carrots as above, will help its colour and give it an agreeable relish,
and by this means you may salt Whey Butter, down in pots, that will
do very well for paste in Winter. In a very sensible, and practical
Essay printed in the third Volume of the _Bath_ Society’s Letters and
Papers on Agriculture, &c. by _Mr. Hazard_, some useful remarks are
made on Dairying, and also on the Dairy-house, which he says, should
always be kept in the neatest order, and so situated, that the Windows
or Lattices never front the South, South-east or South-west; Lattices
are also prefer’d to Windows, as they admit a more free circulation
of Air, than glazed lights possible can do, and to prevent the cold
Air in Winter, a sliding frame coverd with oil’d cap paper, pasted on
packthread strained thereon, will admit the light and keep out the Sun
and Wind. It is hardly possible in the Summer to keep a Dairy-house too
cool, on which account none should be situated far from a good spring
or current of Water: They should be neatly paved with red brick or
smooth hard stone, and laid with a proper descent, so that no Water may
lodge, this pavement should be well wash’d in summer every day; and all
the Utensils belonging to the Dairy should be kept perfectly clean, nor
should the Churns even be suffer’d to be scalded in the Dairy as the
steam that arises from hot Water will injure the Milk, nor do I approve
of Cheese being kept therein, or Rennet for making Cheese, or having a
Cheese Press fixed in a Dairy, as the Whey and Curd will diffuse their
acidity throughout the Room. He is of opinion the proper receptacle for
Milk are Earthen-pans or Wooden-vats, but not lined with lead, as that
mineral certainly contains a poisonous quality and may in some degree
affect the Milk, but if people still persist in using them, he advises
that they never forget to scald them, scrub them well with salt and
Water and to dry them thoroughly before they deposit the Milk therein,
indeed all Utensils should be cleaned in like manner before they are
used, and if after this, they in the least degree smell sour, they
must undergo a second scrubbing before they are fit for use, he also
recommends Pans with a large-surface, or wide at top; during the Summer
Months he recommends skimming the Milk very early in the Morning before
the Dairy becomes warm, and not in the Evening till after Sun set;
churning he recommends to be done in a Morning before the Sun appears,
taking care to fix the churn where there is a free draft of Air, if a
pump churn be used it may be plunged a foot deep into a tub of cold
water to remain there the whole time of churning, which will very much
harden the Butter; a strong rancid flavour will be given to Butter, if
the churn be so near the fire as to heat the wood, in the Winter season.

After Butter is churned, it should be washed in many different waters
till it is perfectly cleansed from the Butter-milk, but he observes a
warm hand will soften it and make it appear greasey: The Cheese-mongers
use two pieces of Wood (or Spaddles) for their Butter, and if those who
have a very hot hand were to have such, they might work the Butter, so
as to make it more saleable.

Butter will require, and endure, more working in Winter than in Summer,
but he remarks he never knew any person, whose hand was warm by nature
make good Butter.

Those who use a pump churn must endeavour to keep a regular stroke, nor
should they admit any person to assist them, except they keep nearly
the same stroke, for if they churn more slowly, the Butter will in
Winter, go back, as it is called, and if the stroke be more quick and
violent, in the Summer it will cause a fermentation, by which means
the Butter will imbibe a very disagreeable flavor. Where many Cows are
kept, a barrel churn is preferable, but it requires to be kept very
clean or the bad effects will be discover’d in the Butter, to be fixt
in a warm place in Winter, and where there is a free Air in the Summer.

As many of my acquaintance wished to have an enlarged account, of the
Art of making Butter: I was very glad to have the opportunity, of
collecting these annex’d, which are most of them worthy observation,
and as I have before mention’d the method some people use in making
Butter from what is generally call’d clouted cream; I shall now give
you the process as laid down by _Mr. Hazard_.

“In the first place, they deposit their Milk in Earthen-pans in their
Dairy-house, and (after they have stood twelve Hours in the Summer, and
double that space in the Winter) they remove them to stoves made for
that purpose, which stoves are filled with hot embers; on these they
remain till bubbles rise, and the Cream changes its colour, it is then
deem’d heated enough, and this they call scalded Cream, it is afterward
removed steadily to the Dairy, where it remains twelve Hours more, and
is then skimmed from the Milk and put into a Tub or Churn, if it be put
into a Tub, it is beat well with the hand, and thus they obtain Butter,
but a cleanlier way is to make use of a Churn; some scald it over the
fire, but then the smoke is apt to affect it, and in either case if the
pans touch the fire, they will crack or fly, and the Milk and Cream be
wasted.”

Dairy-women are oft times much perplex’d when churning, by having the
Butter very long in coming, the cause of which I have never heard
properly explain’d, some think the Cream was too cold, sometimes it
is thought too hot, many observe that an irregular motion in churning
prevents its coming properly, as before remark’d by _Mr. Hazard_, but
there seems to be a more powerful chemical cause; from observing
common causes, I should imagine there is an alcaline salt in old Milk,
which sometimes overcomes the oily part of the Cream when agitated by
the motion of churning, so as to prevent the Butter, separating in
the churn, the cure for which seems to be, to reduce the alcali to a
neuteral state, which effect, Acids are known to have, or at least
alcalies on Acids, as is common; when Beer gets sour or much Acid, to
recover it by putting a little salt of Tartar, salt of Worm-wood or any
other powerful alcali into it, immediately recovers it to its usual
state, and neither the acid nor alcali are perceived in the Beer, being
made neuteral by their union.

I am much pleas’d to find my opinion seconded, and put in practice by
an anonimous Author in the _Bath_ Papers, who was very earnest to find
out a remedy that would hasten the operation in churning, and from a
very pertinent idea that led him to weigh the matter, seems to have
found out the real cause of the obstruction, met with in the work,
and also a remedy, which many Dairy-women will be very happy to be
inform’d of, as the Author justly observes, it will shorten the Labour
of many a weary Arm, and prevent much vexation to a multitude of good
House-wives.

He observes, that when the operation of churning had been going forward
for half a Day, he caused a little distilled Vinegar to be poured into
the churn, and the Butter was produced within an Hour afterwards.

He also remarks upon the subject, that if the supposition be admitted,
that the Cream of old Milk (and such is Milk for the most part in
Winter,) contains much stronger alcaline salt, or at least more of it
than new Milk does, then the effect of the Vinegar is readily accounted
for on the known principles of Chymistry, it is an acknowledged
property of alcalies to unite with oil into a saponaceous (or soapy)
mass, and to render them intimately miscible with water. But it is
likewise well known to chemists that there is a nearer affinity (as
they Term it) a much stronger elective attraction between acids and
alcalies than between alcalies and oils; consequently the acids being
mixed with the Cream, immediately attaches to itself the alcaline salt,
which is the bond of union, as we may call it, that holds together
the oleaginous (oily) and aqueous (watery) particles, and leaves them
easily separable from each other. It may perhaps be objected to this
mode of practice that the acid mixing with the Cream, would render the
Butter unpalatable; but this on experience I do not find to be the
case, and indeed I should not my self have expected it, as the Butter
is usually well washed in two or three changes of clean Water, by which
the whole of the acid is carried off, or if some few particles remain,
they are so few as not to be perceiv’d by the taste & perhaps have
rather a desirable effect than otherwise, by acting as an antiseptic,
(preventing putrefaction) and preventing the Butter from becoming
rancid so soon as it otherwise would do; he adds, my experiments
have not as yet ascertained the exact quantity of the acid which is
necessary to produce the proper effect, nor the precise time of its
being mix’d with the Cream. But I apprehend a table spoonful or two to
a gallon of Cream will be sufficient; nor would I recommend it to be
applied, till the Cream has undergone some considerable agitation.

After having so much interested myself in endeavouring the improvement
of Dairying, I am unwilling to take my final leave of it, without
adding my sincere wish, that the increase of Dairy-Farms, may meet with
every encouragement from the Public, as it appears to me, a matter of
the first consequence to this Nation. The price of Butter & Cheese
having so much increased within a few years, makes it quite necessary
to give every encouragement to the increase of Dairying, as it plainly
appears, there is not near a sufficiency of those Articles for general
use, and every endeavour to increase the quantity must be for the
Public good, if we only consider how large a quantity of Butter is
imported into England every Year, and yet the price still continues
to advance; it is astonishing to think that there is annually great
quantities of Grain of different kinds imported into the Kingdom, while
such a prodigious quantity of Land lies waste in commons or that are
of very little benefit to the community in general; also, how many
thousand People (both young and old) are now unemploy’d, who might
find sufficient support, if encouragement was given for improving of
Land for different purposes, and growth of numerous materials which
now takes our Money abroad, such as Rhubarb, Liquorish, Madder, Woad,
Teasels, Flax, Hemp, &c. As a plan for improvement in Husbandry, seems
much to prevail at present in this Kingdom, as if in emulation, to keep
pace with the Arts, and ingenuity discoverable in many of our capital
Manufactures in the present Age, so superior to those of former times
and which are still improving in a very great degree, so from the
various Societies connected in different parts of this Kingdom, for the
benefit and improvement of Agriculture, great knowledge is acquired
and made Public for the general advantage of community, and if the
same spirit would animate Gentlemen in common, who doubtless are the
people that will receive the greatest advantage from the inclosure of
commons, it would be a noble example, and discover a true patriotic
spirit, if they would undertake the improvement of the Lands, which
may be inclos’d, and who have it more in their power, especially where
small Farms are necessary, (than the peasant to whom they may be let,
and who, when they are made useful can perhaps best employ them for
the Public good,) they would then be well repaid for their trouble,
be setting a noble example to posterity, making a fortune for their
Family, at the same time they are enabling numbers to gain a livelihood
by their means, and what is there in Life that would more endear them
to their Country, than such a benevolent disposition. I have not a
doubt but the proportion of large Farms throughout this Kingdom is
too great for the small ones, and if the inclosure of commons should
take place, there would be a proper opportunity to equalize them, by
making a larger number of small Farms of different degrees, from 20
Acres to 50, from 50 to 100 and from 100 to 150, for tho’ it is from
large Farms, that our principal supply of provisions must arise, yet
it certainly is from the small Farms that our Markets are chiefly
supply’d with the common necessaries, such as Butter, Eggs, Fowls,
Pigs, Pigeons, Fruit and many other common necessaries of human Life,
and the more small and moderate siz’d Farms there are, the better will
all Markets be supplied. I have not a doubt but if Gentlemen would
undertake the management of new enclosures, great improvement might
be made from the Horse-hove, and drill Husbandry so much commended by
many of the _Bath_ Society correspondents, as well as those of _Arthur
Young, Esq._; and from the advantage proposed thereby of improving
Land by those methods, with very little manure, if Gentlemen would
thoroughly adopt that method upon a large scale of practice, doubtless
it would become universal, and from the great quantity of Seed proposed
to be saved by this method, and a larger crop produced, must in the
end be a very great advantage to this Nation; many may object, that
the inclosed commons, will very little of it become Dairy-Land for a
considerable time; yet it will certainly come in, in time, and the
more Arable Land is brought into use, certainly the greater proportion
of Grass Land may be spared for the Dairy. One great impediment to
inclosures is the great expence of Acts of Parliament, this might be
remedied in a great measure, if Government would grant one general
Act for inclosing commons throughout the Kingdom, under the direction
of County Committees, which might be appointed for that purpose at a
moderate expence, and fully answer the design, but as a hint at the
improvement, is the only thing I can advance toward it, yet, like the
Widows mite, I would not with hold it, as it may encourage more capable
Persons to take it in hand.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_SOME ACCOUNT_, OF NOXIOUS, BITTER, and POISONOUS, PLANTS.


Ribwort, ribbed grass, black plantain or cock plant; this plant may
not properly be ranged among bitter plants, it not being bitter to
any great degree, but I have often thought upon examination, that the
bitterness in some Cheese more resembles the taste of this plant and
dandelion than any other whatsoever, and in barren soils they are apt
to prevail more than any other.

Arsmart, or lakeweed, is a bitter plant, well known; ’tis said to
produce an essential oil, or oil extracted by distillation, which I
should imagine more likely to affect the bitterness of Milk than colder
plants, it is apt to grow very strong after being mowed, and I have
not observed that Cows refuse or leave it untouched more than other
plants in common. I think this plant much more likely to cause the
bitterness of Butter in _Autumn_ than the falling leaves to which it is
generally referred, though many people are of opinion that Cows eating
ash leaves in _Autumn_, causes the bitterness in Butter.

Meadow sweet--is a bitterish plant that Cows are fond of, especially
the sort that grows on up-lands, commonly called drop-wort, the
meadow sweet of low-meadows is a sort they do not readily feed on where
there is plenty of Grass.

Centaury, lesser centaury or gentian, is an extream bitter plant, bears
a pale red blossom with many florets, or pips, on an upright stem in
old Pastures, blows from _June_ to _August_, I should imagine it must
be hurtful in Dairy-ground being a very penetrating bitter.

Hemlock, with stems and branches, spotted with brown, or black,
and white flower; the whole plant is poisonous, it grows in hedges,
orchards, or among rubbish, and is very common.

Henbane, with blossoms purple & brown--indented leaves, embracing or
cleaving to the stem, grows on road sides or among rubbish, the seeds,
roots, and leaves taken internally are all poisonous.

Nightshade, grows in moist brakes and hedges, with bluish blossoms,
sometimes inclined to flesh colour, sometimes white.

Deadly nightshade--dwale--or belladonna is the worst specie, growing in
woods, hedges, among lime-stone or rubbish; the stem is herbaceous or
of a herby nature, the leaves, spear, or halbert shaped, the flowers
of a bluish purple with a bright yellow thrum, chives, or pointal,
appearing like the snuff of an expiring Candle, the berries grow in
very handsome bunches, first green, then a fine red, next a beautiful
black, are very tempting to Children having cost many their Lives,
causing stupor, delirium, and convulsions, and are certain Death if not
prevented by timely and plentiful vomiting; this plant cannot be too
well known being so very common in most Countries, and so tempting,
both to Children and Cattle.

Cow-bane, water-virosa, or water-hemlock--with rundles or flower
branches opposite the leaves, leaf-stalks with blunt borders, with
about seven pair of little leaves, which are variously divided and
indented, petals, or leaf of the flower, yellowish pale green, grows
in shallow waters, is a perennial plant, or that continues from year
to year, blows in _July_; this is one of the rankest of our vegetable
poisons; numerous instances are recorded of its Fatality to the human
species; an account of it may be seen and an engraving in Martin’s
Philosophical Transactions, Vol. 10. Early in the spring when it grows
in the water, Cows often eat it and are killed by it, but as the Summer
advances and its smell becomes stronger, they carefully avoid it;
though a certain fatal poison to Cows, Goats devour it greedily and
with impunity, Horses and Sheep eat it with safety.

Cow-weed, or wild Cecily, grows in hedges, blows in _May_, or _June_,
with white flowers, roots like a Parsnip, and is very poisonous.

Water-wort, Water-hemlock, or Water-skeleton, is esteem’d a fatal
poison to Horses, occasioning them to become paralytick, which is owing
to an insect called _Curcutia Paraplecticus_, which generally inhabits
within the stem; the usual antidote is pig’s dung, the branches of the
leaves stradling--stem very thick, hollow, scored, petals or flowers
white, grows in rivers, ditches and pools, blossoms in _June_; in the
Winter the roots and stem dissected by the influence of the weather,
afford a curious skeleton, or network.

Kex, or water-parsnip, with white flowers in _July_ or _August_, grows
in rivers and fens, is very noxious to Cattle; also the lesser Kex
called upright water-parsnip, in rivers and ditches, is very common;
blossoms in _July_ and _August_, leaves halbert shaped, rundles or
flower-branch opposite the leaves.

Drop-wort, or dead tongue, grows on the banks of rivers, bears a white
flower in _June_, the petals or leaves of the flower sharp--bent
inwards, tips purple or brown--the whole of this plant is poisonous,
the stem is a yellowish red, the leaves smooth, streaked, jagged at
the edges, the root is the rankest and most virulent of all vegetable
poisons.

Mithridate--or penny-cress, grows in corn fields with oblong leaves,
toothed, smooth, white blossoms; the whole plant has something of a
garlick flavour, the seeds have the acrimony or sharpness of mustard;
Cows are rather fond of it, and I should think their Milk is often
affected by it.

Penny-wort, or white-rot, grows in marshy springy ground, with a pale
red flower, blows in _May_; many Farmers suppose it occasions the rot
in Sheep, but I should expect that complaint proceeds from a very
different cause; though, if flowks that are supposed to be the certain
cause of the Rot, or the spawn of them, are taken in with the food
of Sheep, as some imagine, it is possible the Ova, or Eggs of this
Insect may be deposited in this plant, which to know, may be worth the
Farmer’s enquiry.


_Some Account of the_ RUNNET-PLANT.

Yellow Verum--Goose-grass; the Leaves growing by eights, or eight
leaves round the stem, strap-shaped--furrowed--the flowering branches
short, blossoms yellow.

English Names, are yellow ladies bed-straw or Cheese Renning, or
petty muguet; it grows in dry ground, on road sides, very common, is
perennial, blows in _July_ or _August_. The flowers will coagulate
boiling Milk, and some _Cheshire_ Cheese is said to be made with them;
according to an experiment from _Borrchius_ they yield an Acid by
distillation. The _French_ prescribe them in hysterick and epileptick
cases, boiled in Allum-water they tinge wool yellow, the roots dye a
very fine red, not inferior to Madder and are used for this purpose in
the _Island_ of _Jura_. See _Pennant’s Tour_, 1772, Page 214. Sheep and
Goats eat it, Horses and Swine refuse it, Cows are not fond of it. If
the roots will answer the same purpose as Madder it highly merits the
observation of _Calico Printers_ and others, who use large quantities
of that Article, as it is the most common weed, and what in the month
of _July_, there is more of, than any other weed, and if the flowers
will dye yellow, and make Cheese, it must be a very valuable Plant and
be a great help to the Poor to collect it, as it grows on all road
sides, old pastures and hedges in great abundance.

I have omitted giving the Latin names of Plants, not having sufficient
knowledge in that Language; but such of my learned readers who with for
that addition, may refer either to _Dr. Withering’s_, or other books on
_Botany_, to _Chambers_, _Croker_, or other Dictionaries.


_FINIS._




[Illustration]




INDEX.


  A.

        Page.

  Annatto, 68

  Arsmart, 95, 135

  Alcaline, 127


  B.

  Bulged Cheese, 58

  Blister’d Ditto, 35

  Blue-pared Ditto, 52, 85

  Brine drippings, 43

  Bull Cheese, 45

  Breaking-curd, 48, 49, 86

  Bitter Cheese, 95

  Breeders of Cows, 101

  Butter, 116

  Brick-bat Cheese, 63


  C.

  Curd, 14, 90

  Cow described, 17

  Curdly Cheese, 59

  Cream Cheese, 64

  Colouring Cheese, 66, 71

  Cheese from poor Land, 88

  ---- from Clover, 94

  ---- from any Land, 79

  Cheese-Powder, 56

  Cheese Press, 98

  Cheese Vats, 108

  Centaury, 136

  Cow-Bane, 138

  Cow-Weed, 139

  Chill Cheese, 31, 65

  Cochineal, 72

  Correspondence, 90, 109

  Cheese Chamber, 104


  D.

  Dry Cracks, 12, 59, 84

  Dairy-women, 11, 15, 72

  Dairying, 16

  Dairy-Ground, 26

  Drop-Wort, 140

  Dairy-House, 122


  E.

  Eyes in Cheese, 11, 32


  F.

  Fermentation, 33

  Fixt Air, 33, 34, 54, 94

  Foul Air, 55, 93

  Flavour, 104, 105

  Frost, 64, 106

  Flakey Cheese, 51, 66, 103


  G.

  General quantity of Cheese, 21, 24

  Green Whey, 52


  H.

  Hove Cheese, 34, 54, 105

  Husky Coated Cheese, 12

  Harsh Air, 55

  Hemlock, 136

  Henbane, 137

  Honey-comb Cheese, 33


  J.

  Jointed Cheese, 53, 85


  K.

  Kex, 139


  L.

  Loose Cheese, 33, 35


  M.

  Milk, 17, 18, 26, 98, 102

  ---- carried in Churns, 26, 84

  Milk-warm, 28

  Maw-Skin, 36, 41, 43

  ---- way to make them, 42

  Marigold Cheese, 71

  Meadow Sweet, 138

  Mithridate, 140


  N.

  Noxious Plants, 12, 95, 98

  Night Shade, 137

  Nitre, 56


  P.

  Parsley Cheese, 67

  Poisonous Plants, 95, 97

  Pasturage, 13, 96

  Penny-Cress, 140

  Penny Wort, 140


  Q.

  Quantity of Cheese from the same Milk, 8, 80, 92

  Quantity of Cheese made, 22, 81


  R.

  Rank Cheese, 12, 54, 55, 90

  Rotten Cheese, 54

  Rendling Milk, 27, 33, 42, 81

  Running Streams, 22, 103

  Runnet-Plant, 109, 110

  Rib Wort, 135

  Runnet to make, 43, 52, 110


  S.

  Sweet Cheese, 51, 77

  Spongy Cheese, 54

  Split Cheese, 57

  Salting in Milk, 28, 30, 58

  Salting in Curd, 57

  Spear-Grass, 111

  Slip-Curd, 31, 35, 50, 61, 65

  Sunk Cheese, 47, 89

  Sunk coated Cheese, 59

  Skimmed Cheese, 60, 61, 65

  Sage Cheese, 71

  Salutary Plants, 99

  Saintfoin Grass, 100

  Scalding Cheese, 107

  Slip-coat Cheese, 62, 65


  T.

  Time in Earning, 14, 31, 45, 47, 61

  Tears, 32

  Two-meal Cheese, 60

  Turnip Butter, 121


  W.

  Whey Springs, 11, 32

  Warmth of Milk, 28, 29

  Warming Milk, 30, 31

  Warmth, 61, 103, 104

  Washing Cheese, 105

  White Whey, 52

  Water-wort, 139




ERRATA.


  Page 127 line 2d for Alclaine, read Alcaline.
  ---- 127 line 9th for Alcalics, read Alcalies.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] By the Term Milk-warm, is not here to be understood, the Warmth
that it has on coming from the Cow, as that varies according to the
Heat of the Body of the Cow, at the Time of Milking, but a Warmth, a
few degrees removed from Coolness; a degree of Warmth, in general well
understood.

[2] Your Cheese will afterwards want a less quantity of Salt, than if
none had been put in the Milk; enough to settle it, and make it firm in
the Press, will be sufficient.

[3] This term, Tears, plainly indicates, that it has been usually
understood in this light, being the Tears of the Eye.

[4] Synonimous Terms.

[5] A description of noxious Plants, will be found at the end of the
Book.

[6] The Plant is described amongst others at the end of this Book.




AGRICULTURAL BOOKS

_PRINTED FOR J. HARDING_,

36, ST. JAMES’S-STREET, LONDON.


_This Day is published, in One Volume Royal Quarto, Price 2l. 2s._

_Boards_,

THE RURAL ARCHITECT;

CONSISTING OF VARIOUS

DESIGNS FOR COUNTRY BUILDINGS;

ACCOMPANIED WITH

GROUND-PLANS, ESTIMATES, AND DESCRIPTIONS.

By JOSEPH GANDY, Architect, A.R.A.

Author of “Designs for Cottages,” &c.


PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.

    Cottages of the most simple form and economical
    construction--House of Business, or Office, as suggested by
    Mr. MARSHALL.--Dairies--A mill--Group of thirteen Cottages,
    designed for the neighbourhood of a Manufactory--Gardener’s
    Cottage--Bath--Several double Cottages--Cottages for three,
    four, and five Families--Ornamental Cottages--Plan of a
    Manufactory and Work-shops--Groups of Cottages, designed upon
    a principle of exciting emulation and rewarding meritorious
    exertion--Habitation for an Overseer of Labourers--Arable,
    Dairy, and Grazing Farms--An Inn--Villas, and small Country
    Dwellings--Entrance-gates--Single and double Lodges, &c. &c.
    &c.--A Rural Institute, or National Establishment, for the
    advancement of Agriculture, on Mr. MARSHALL’S plan.


_In the Press_,

  1. An AGRICULTURAL EXCURSION in IRELAND, with an Account of Two
    Years successful Farming in that Country. By RICHARD PARKINSON,
    Author of the “Experienced Farmer,” and “Farmer’s Tour in
    America.”

  2. A TREATISE on WOOL, comprising a particular Account of its
    essential Qualities and Defects, and pointing out the Objects
    to be attended to by the Grower, with a view to the Improvement
    of the British Fleece. By JOHN LUCCOCK, Woolstapler.

  3. A CATALOGUE of BOOKS on AGRICULTURE and RURAL ECONOMY;
    including some Authors on POLITICAL ECONOMY, and the ARTS, more
    immediately relating to RURAL AFFAIRS.

    Printed by B. M^cMillan, Bow-Street, Covent-Garden.




_Agricultural Books lately published for_ J. HARDING, _London_.

  1. ALDERSON’s ESSAY on the IMPROVEMENT OF POOR SOILS. 8vo. 2s.

  2. SIR JOSEPH BANKS’s SHORT ACCOUNT of the DISEASE in CORN,
    called, by Farmers, the BLIGHT, the MILDEW, and the RUST; with
    a Plate. Price 2s.

  3. BARTLEY (Secretary to the Bath Society) on the Conversion of
    PASTURE LAND into TILLAGE--on the MANUFACTURE of POTATOES into
    STARCH--and on the utility of applying POTATOES as FOOD for
    SHEEP. 1s. 6d.

  4. BARTLEY’s LETTERS on Extending the GROWTH of FINE CLOTHING
    WOOL, by INTERBREEDING with SPANISH RAMS and BRITISH EWES. 2s.

  5. BARBER’s FARM-BUILDINGS, or RURAL ECONOMY; containing a
    minute Description of the Mode of Building in Pisé. 4to. 6
    Plates. 10s. 6d.

  6. CULLEY’s OBSERVATIONS on LIVE STOCK, with Directions for
    choosing and improving the best Breeds of Domestic Animals,
    with Plates. 8vo. New Edition. Price 6s.

  7. The EARL of DUNDONALD’s TREATISE; shewing the intimate
    Connexion that subsists between Agriculture and Chemistry:
    addressed to the Cultivators of the Soil. 4to. 10s. 6d.

  8. GARRARD’s PLATES, descriptive of the Improved Breeds of
    British Cattle, folio.

  9. HARRISON on the ROT in SHEEP, and other Animals. 8vo. 2s.

  10. MARSHALL’S RURAL ECONOMY of the WEST of ENGLAND. A new and
    enlarged Edition, 8vo. 2 vols. 15s.

  11. PARKINSON’s EXPERIENCED FARMER, embracing the whole SYSTEM
    of AGRICULTURE, BREEDING, &c. 2 vols. 1l. 1s.

  12. PARKINSON’s TOUR in AMERICA, in 1798, 1799, and 1800,
    giving a particular Account of the American System of
    Husbandry, &c. &c. 2 vols. 8vo. 15s.

  13. A PRACTICAL and EXPERIMENTAL INQUIRY into the NATURE and
    PROPERTIES of the DIFFERENT KINDS of MANURES. 2s.

  14. STICKNEY’s OBSERVATIONS respecting the GRUB. 8vo. 2s.

  15. The GAME BOOK; enabling the Sportsman to keep an Account
    of Game, when and where killed, and other Particulars, in the
    manner of a Journal. 7s. 1l. 1s. or 2l. 2s.




_Lately published by_ J. HARDING, _in Royal Quarto, with 43 Plates,
price 2l. 2s._

DESIGNS

FOR COTTAGES, COTTAGE FARMS,

_AND OTHER RURAL BUILDINGS_;

INCLUDING ENTRANCE-GATES AND LODGES.

By JOSEPH GANDY, Architect, A.R.A.

This Volume will prove useful to Architects and Gentlemen who build on
their Estates, as it contains a great variety of COUNTRY BUILDINGS,
designed in a style of peculiar beauty, and possessing every advantage
of interior accommodation and economical arrangement. Each Plate is
accompanied with a Ground Plan, Estimate, and Letter-press Descriptions.


CONTENTS.

  Plate 1. A Cottage of one room, for a Labourer, Gate-keeper,
    &c. 2. Another. 3. A Cottage, with conveniences for keeping
    Pigs, &c. 4. Ditto of two rooms, intended for a Park. 5.
    A double Cottage. 6. A Cottage for a Labourer who keeps a
    Cow, &c. 7. Another. 8. Ditto, of two rooms. 9. Ditto, with
    a bed-room above stairs. 10. An ornamental Cottage for a
    Gentleman’s Grounds. 11. Cottage, with bed-rooms above. 12.
    Cottage, with Cow-house, &c. under one roof. 13. Ornamental
    Cottage for a Park. 14. A Cottage-dwelling of two rooms. 15.
    Picturesque Cottage for a Shepherd. 16. Cottage and Bridge. 17.
    Country Residence, with bed-rooms above. 18. Plan for two or
    four Cottages on the banks of a river, and sketch for a Bridge.
    19. Picturesque Farm-dwelling. 20. A small Country Residence.
    21. A Cottager’s Dwelling. 22. A Green-house and Conservatory,
    with residence for the Gardener. 23. A Farrier’s Shop, with
    Stables and Habitation annexed. 24. A Picturesque Cottage of
    three Rooms. 25. A Cottage of three rooms. 26. Habitation
    near a Market-town. 27. A Picturesque Building designed for a
    Public house. 28. Residence for a Market-town. 29. A double
    Cottage, with conveniences for Farming. 30. Picturesque double
    Cottage. 31. A small Farm. 32. A Picturesque Farm-dwelling. 33.
    A Grazing Farm. 34. Gentleman’s Farming Residence. 35. Circular
    group of eight Cottages. 36. Plan for a Village. 37. A Country
    Residence or Hunting Box. 38. A double Lodge, and arched
    entrance to a Park. 39. Circular single Lodge and Gate. 40.
    Single Lodge and Covered-way. 41. A double Lodge, consisting of
    thatched Cones. 42. A Lodge with Octagon Piers and Ornaments.
    43. A Lodge and Arched Gateway.




_Lately published, for_ J. HARDING, _St. James’s Street, London_.

  1. PICTURESQUE EXCURSIONS in DEVONSHIRE. By T. H. WILLIAMS,
    Plymouth. Illustrated with 27 Views, drawn and etched by the
    Author. In royal 8vo. Price 1l. 8s. boards.

    The object of this Work is to give slight Sketches of the
    most striking Scenery in the County of Devon, accompanied
    with a Description of the most remarkable Places, and their
    Inhabitants. In this plan he has certainly succeeded. Many
    of the Sketches are most beautifully executed, and the Work
    must prove a valuable present to the Lovers of Painting
    and fine Scenery, and to those who may reside in or visit
    Devonshire.--_Literary Journal, October, 1804._

  2. DRUNKEN BARNABY’s FOUR JOURNEYS to the NORTH of ENGLAND, in
    Latin and English Metre. A new Edition, with 7 Plates. Price
    7s. boards; or, large paper, 12s.

    This is a republication of a curious little Work, originally
    printed in the 16th century. The Author, whoever he was, shews
    himself acquainted with the History, Antiquities, and Customs
    of every place he visits, and exhibits so much acuteness
    of remark, and keenness of satire, that he is evidently a
    Drunkard, merely in masquerade.

  3. A DICTIONARY of PAINTERS, from the Revival of the Art to the
    present period. By the Rev. M. PILKINGTON, A. M. A new Edition,
    with considerable Alterations and Additions, by HENRY FUSELI,
    R. A. 4to. Price 1l. 16s.; or, large paper, 2l. 12s. 6d.

  4. THE POEMS of OSSIAN; a new and beautiful Edition,
    embellished with twelve Engravings by FITTLER, from Paintings
    by SINGLETON, 3 vols. foolscap 8vo. Price 1l. 1s. boards; or,
    on large paper, 1l. 16s.

  5. THE DANCE of DEATH; represented in 30 Plates, painted by
    HOLBEIN, and engraved by HOLLAR, in 1 vol. foolscap 8vo. Price
    10s. 6d.--large 8vo. 15s.--or in 4to. 1l. 1s. boards.

    In the early ages of Christianity, it was the practice to
    represent the fallacy of worldly pleasures, and the transitory
    nature of all our pursuits, by exhibiting upon the walls of
    the churches, and in other situations, several figures carried
    away by Skeletons or _Deaths_, in the midst of their amusements
    and occupations. Of this kind is the Dance of Death, painted
    by HOLBEIN, and engraved by HOLLAR, in the sixteenth century.
    The Plates in this very curious and interesting Publication,
    thirty in number, are from the _original Coppers etched by_
    HOLLAR, and some of the subjects are very beautiful.--_Literary
    Journal, June, 1804._

  6. ELEMENTS of SCIENCE and ART; being a familiar Introduction
    to NATURAL PHILOSOPHY and CHEMISTRY: together with their
    Application to a variety of elegant and useful Arts. By JOHN
    IMISON. A new Edition, considerably enlarged and improved. In
    2 large vols. 8vo.; with an Index, and 32 Engravings by LOWRY.
    Price 1l. 5s. boards.

    The first edition of this Work was reviewed by us in our
    72d vol.; but it is now so greatly enlarged, that we have
    reviewed it as a new production; and we think its merits are
    considerable. There is very little in SCIENCE and ART, which
    the Author does not touch upon; much, therefore, evidently
    cannot be said upon each, but what is given is stated properly
    and judiciously. Its multifarious information must render this
    compilation useful and entertaining.--_Monthly Rev. Sept. 1804._

    Printed by B. M^cMillan, Bow-Street, Covent-Garden.




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

The Errata noted on page 144 of the original text have been corrected
in place.

Italics are represented thus _italic_, spaced text is represented thus
~s p a c e d~, superscripts are represented thus y^n.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAIRYING EXEMPLIFIED, OR, THE BUSINESS OF CHEESE-MAKING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




The Project Gutenberg eBook of The book of The Cheese
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The book of The Cheese Being traits and stories of "Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese"

Compiler: Thomas Wilson Reid

Editor: R. R. D. Adams
        Frank Banfield
        William Hussey Graham

Illustrator: active 1859-1891 Walter James Allen
        George Cruikshank
        John Seymour Lucas
        Joseph Pennell
        Herbert Railton

Release date: June 16, 2023 [eBook #70991]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Ye Old Cheshire Cheese, 1908

Credits: Bob Taylor, deaurider and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE CHEESE ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  THE

  Book of the Cheese

  BEING TRAITS AND STORIES OF

  “Y^E OLDE CHESHIRE CHEESE”

  WINE OFFICE COURT, FLEET STREET
  LONDON, E.C.

  COMPILED BY THE LATE T. W. REID

  THIRD EDITION REVISED BY WILLIAM HUSSEY GRAHAM

  FOURTH EDITION EDITED BY R. R. D. ADAMS, M.A.

  FIFTH EDITION

  REVISED AND ABRIDGED BY FRANK BANFIELD, M.A. (OXON.)

  _ILLUSTRATED BY MESSRS.
  SEYMOUR LUCAS, R.A., HERBERT RAILTON, JOSEPH PENNELL,
  WALTER ALLEN & GEORGE CRUICKSHANK_

  “Shall I not take mine ease in mine inn?”—SHAKESPEARE

  London:
  “Y_{E} OLDE CHESHIRE CHEESE”
  145, FLEET STREET, E.C.
  1908




PREFACE

TO

THE FIFTH EDITION

_TO OUR FRIENDS AND CUSTOMERS THROUGHOUT THE WORLD_


In the present edition, while most of the matter which has appeared
in previous editions of our little book has been retained, we have
deleted portions that we considered could be dispensed with, and
added some fresh incidents and reminiscences that we think may add to
its interest. We have enlarged the work by the addition of a chapter
descriptive of the pictures and objects of interest to be seen within
the precincts of this historic House. We desire to record our thanks
to Messrs. W. Marchant & Co., of the Goupil Gallery, 5, Regent
Street, for assistance given in relation to the pictures, and to many
old customers of the House for facts relating to its past history.

  Yours obediently,
  THE DIRECTORS.
  O. C. C., LD.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                         PAGE

     I. EARLY HISTORY OF YE OLDE CHESHIRE CHEESE                     1

    II. JOHNSON AND GOLDSMITH AT THE “CHEESE”                        9

   III. RELICS AND ART TREASURES OF THE “CHEESE”                    15

    IV. MR. JOSEPH PENNELL AND LADY COLIN CAMPBELL ON THE “CHEESE”  26

     V. ABOUT THE PUDDING                                           33

    VI. THE BAR                                                     37

   VII. CLUB LIFE AT THE “CHEESE”                                   42

  VIII. DR. JOHNSON’S HOMES AND HAUNTS                              55

    IX. THE “CHEESE” AND ITS FARE—A GREAT FALL IN PUDDING           57

     X. MR. GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA AND OTHERS ON THE “CHEESE”         61

    XI. THE PRESS AND THE “CHEESE”                                  65

   XII. WHAT THE WORLD SAYS OF THE “CHEESE”                         72

  XIII. THE “CHESHIRE CHEESE” IN LITERATURE                         85




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  _PLATES_

  “TODDY AT THE CHESHIRE CHEESE,” _by
  W. Dendy Sadler_                                      _Frontispiece_

  “THE COSY CORNER” IN OLD CHESHIRE
  CHEESE                                               _to face p._ 13

  THE JOHNSONIAN CORNER                 ”                           18

  DR. JOHNSON’S CHAIR                   ”                           22

  AN INCIDENT AT THE OLD CHESHIRE
  CHEESE                                ”                           23

  “THE WAY IN”                          ”                           27

  THE BAR                               ”                           37

  “THE WAY OUT”                         ”                           38

  DR. JOHNSON’S HOUSE IN GOUGH SQUARE      ”                        55


  _IN TEXT_
                                             PAGE

  ENTRANCE TO THE OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE IN
  WINE OFFICE COURT                                                  5

  STAIRCASE IN “OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE”                                 8

  CHESHIRE COURT AT SIDE OF OLD CHESHIRE
  CHEESE                                                            25

  FRONTISPIECE OF BILL OF FARE                                      78




  PRINTED BY

  EDEN FISHER & CO., LTD., 95-97, FENCHURCH ST.,

  LONDON, E.C.

[Illustration: “TODDY AT THE CHESHIRE CHEESE.” _By W. Dendy Sadler._

_By permission of Mr. L. H. Lefèvre, owner of the Copyright._]




[Illustration: A _Storied_ TAVERN.]




CHAPTER I

EARLY HISTORY OF YE OLDE CHESHIRE CHEESE

                      Time consecrates;
    And what is grey with age becomes religion.—SCHILLER.


Old London is fast disappearing off the face of the earth. One by
one its ancient taverns have gone, or if the names familiar to our
ancestors have been retained, the hand of the builder has been laid
remorselessly on the structures our forefathers knew, and they
have been transformed beyond recognition. One of them, however,
survives, untouched by the hand of time, spared by the vitality of
the traditions, literary and other, which it enshrines, and that
is the Cheshire Cheese. Though its story reaches back long before
the eighteenth century, it is with the memory of Dr. Johnson and his
more brilliant contemporaries that it is very largely associated
in the minds of men. It is in a special sense London’s living
memorial of the great Lexicographer. Amid the changes which have
altered Fleet Street almost beyond recognition by the Doctor and his
contemporaries, it stands safe still, its old activities in full
swing in the narrow backwater of Wine Office Court, a venerable
reminder of the past. That men should be possessed with an unwearying
curiosity about the old tavern which was so much the haunt of the
mighty literary potentate who was the patron and friend of Goldsmith,
is but natural. They feel for it what the devotee feels for a
shrine. Dr. Johnson was not himself indifferent to a sentiment of
the sort, and just as we take an intense interest in the “Cheshire
Cheese” which he frequented, so he, in his day, was sympathetically
curious as to the places which Dryden half a century or so before the
Doctor’s time had made sacred to literary memory by his presence.

“When I was a young fellow,” he says, “I wanted to write the life
of Dryden, and in order to get materials I applied to the only two
persons then alive who had seen him; these were old Swinney and old
Cibber. Swinney’s information was no more than this, ‘That at Will’s
Coffee-house, Dryden had a particular chair for himself, which was
set by the fire in winter and then called his winter chair, and that
it was carried out for him to the balcony in summer, and then called
his summer chair.’ I went and sat in it.”

Thanks, therefore, to the fact that we have one specimen of the
Johnsonian tavern remaining practically the same as it was in the
Johnsonian days, we can still depict for ourselves, with but the
slightest effort of the imagination, what must have been the scene
at the Cheshire Cheese in the Doctor’s time. Johnson is there in his
favourite seat, mouthing and talking as who should say: “I am Sir
Oracle, and when I ope my mouth let no dog bark.” One or other of his
friends is never wanting to keep him company—Burke, or Goldsmith, or
it may be Langton or Beauclerk. But the inn is with us, though the
men of the eighteenth century are gone.

Even then the tavern as a club was beginning to fall into comparative
decay. Fashion was voting for the club proper, proprietary or
otherwise, and the habit of ceasing to live in the City carried away
the old frequenters of the Fleet Street taverns into the suburbs or
the more distant environs of London. Washington Irving gives us in
his “Sketch Book” a charming account of one of the city of London
hostelries, as it was at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The opening of the description would serve for the Cheshire Cheese
of to-day. “This has been a temple of Mirth and Wine from time
immemorial. It has always been in the family, so that its history
is tolerably well preserved by the present landlord. It was much
frequented by the gallants and cavalieros of the reign of Elizabeth,
and was looked into now and then by the wits of Charles the Second.
The members of the club which now holds its weekly sessions there
abound in old catches, glees, and choice stories that are traditional
in the place. The life of the club, and indeed the prime wit of the
neighbourhood, is mine host himself. At the opening of every club
night he is called in to sing his ‘Confession of Faith,’ which is the
famous old drinking troll from Gammer Gurton’s ‘Needle.’” Washington
Irving gives the words of the four verses of the song with chorus,
the first of which, as a specimen of an old-time City tavern song,
may suffice to be produced here:

              I cannot eate but little meat,
                My stomack is not good;
              But sure I think that I can drink
                With him that wears a hood.
              Though I go bare, take ye no care,
                I nothing am acold.
              I stuff my skin so full within
                With jolly good ale and old.

    _Chorus_: Back and side go bare, go bare,
                Both foote and hand go cold;
              But belly! God send thee good ale enough,
                Whether it be new or old.

But from the time of Dr. Johnson down to the present day unbroken
links of tradition connect the Cheshire Cheese of the twentieth
century with the Cheshire Cheese of the eighteenth, and through
that with all the taverns in story, which begin with the Tabard and
pass on, through the Mermaid and the rest, to the old house in Wine
Office Court. This venerable survivor of a vanished race has a double
interest: to the lover of antiquity in general it appeals as the type
of the place our forefathers loved; to the lover of the Johnsonian
cycle, as enabling him to picture to himself what that race of giants
did, where they ate and drank, and where they talked. That they had
reason for their choice of an inn, and could give a reason for that
choice too, is plain from a well-known passage in Boswell, which runs
as follows:—

[Illustration: ENTRANCE TO THE “OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE” IN WINE OFFICE
COURT.

_From an Original Drawing by Herbert Railton._]

“There is no private house in which people can enjoy themselves so
well as at a capital tavern. Let there be ever so great plenty of
good things, ever so much grandeur, ever so much elegance, ever so
much desire that everybody should be easy, in the nature of things it
cannot be; there must always be some degree of care and anxiety. The
master of the house is anxious to entertain his guests, the guests
are anxious to be agreeable to him; and no man but a very impudent
dog indeed can as freely command what is in another man’s house as
if it were his own. Whereas, at a tavern, there is a general freedom
from anxiety. You are sure you are welcome, and the more noise you
make, the more trouble you give” (we should remember that this was
said in the rougher world of the last century), “the more good things
you call for, the welcomer you are. No servants will attend you
with the alacrity which waiters do who are incited by the prospect
of an immediate reward in proportion as they please. No, Sir, there
is nothing which has yet been contrived by man by which so much
happiness is produced as by a good tavern or inn.”

Although the origin of the Old Cheshire Cheese (formerly spelt “Ye
Olde Cheshire Chese”) is not altogether involved in obscurity, there
is a decided want of complete, or even semi-complete, details as to
its very early history; but it is much more affluent in literary
anecdote.

It was in the Old Cheshire Cheese that the dispute arose about who
would most quickly make the best couplet. One said:—

    I, Sylvester,
    Kiss’d your sister.

The other’s retort was:

    I, Ben Jonson,
    Kiss’d your wife.

“But that’s not rhyme,” said Sylvester. “No,” said Jonson; “but it’s
true.”

A later poet, Lord Tennyson, was himself a frequenter of the “Cheese”
in his young days, while it was there that Isaac Bickerstaff made the
epigram:

    When late I attempted your pity to move,
      What made you so deaf to my prayers?
    Perhaps it was right to dissemble your love,
      But—why did you kick me down stairs?

In fact, the “Cheese” was famous for epigrammatists. Who would not
like to have seen the face of the old glutton and scandalmonger when,
in the “Cheese,” the following lines were solemnly presented to him?—

    You say your teeth are dropping out—
      A serious cause of sorrow,
    Not likely to be cured, I doubt,
      To-day, or yet to-morrow.
    But good may come of this distress,
      While under it you labour,
    If, losing teeth you guzzle less,
      And don’t backbite your neighbour.

That Samuel Johnson, Oliver Goldsmith, and other distinguished men
were in the habit of frequenting the Old Cheshire Cheese, there can
be no manner of doubt, and they knew what they were about in choosing
their place of rendezvous, for I find in a _brochure_ entitled “Round
London” (1725), that the house is described as “Ye Olde Cheshire
Cheese Tavern, near ye Flete Prison, an eating-house for goodly fare.”

Wine Office Court, where the Cheshire Cheese is situated, took its
name from the fact that wine licences were granted in a building
close by. The present “wine office” of the Old Cheshire Cheese is
exactly at the junction of the Court and Fleet Street.

“In this court,” says Mr. Noble, “once flourished a fig tree, planted
a century ago by the vicar of St. Bride’s, who resided at No. 12. It
was a slip from another exile of a tree formerly flourishing in a
sooty kind of grandeur at the sign of the Fig Tree in Fleet Street.”

[Illustration: STAIRCASE IN “OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE.”

_From an Original Drawing by Herbert Railton._]




CHAPTER II

JOHNSON AND GOLDSMITH AT THE “CHEESE”

  There is nothing which has yet been contrived by man, by which so
  much happiness is produced as by a good tavern or inn.—JOHNSON.


Not the least delightful characteristic of the “Cheese” is the
persistency of its old customers. Those who once have been admitted
to its charmed circle soon become wedded to its ways. It is not
merely to the goodly cheer provided there that this loyalty is due,
although, no doubt, to the viands and the wines a share of it is to
be attributed. An anecdote of the late Mr. George Augustus Sala,
the well-known writer, _Daily Telegraph_ special correspondent, and
genial _bon vivant_ and gastronomist, is delightfully illustrative
of the attractions of the place from the side of the creature
comforts. The story is told by the London correspondent of the
_Liverpool Courier_ (December 10, 1895) in recording Mr. Sala’s
death. He writes: “Some years ago Mr. Sala went to Paris on behalf
of the _Daily Telegraph_, to write on the subject of French cooking
and French restaurants. Such praise of Parisian kickshaws was never
lavished before, and the extollation, to the complete discomfiture of
English cooks, lasted for fully six weeks. Everything in the cooking
line in Paris was grand, everything in England in the same line was
horrible. At the end of the six weeks Mr. Sala returned to London,
went immediately to the Cheshire Cheese in Fleet Street and said
to the head waiter—‘William, bring me a beefsteak, some potatoes in
their jackets, and a pint of ale. I’ve had nothing to eat for six
weeks.’”

The sentimental attractions are equally strong, and their influence
is felt even by the most occasional of guests whose situation in
life, or whose distance from London, unfortunately precludes their
being regular attendants at the hostelry. A fine acrostic sent to
the landlord by the Rev. William Kerr-Smith, Vicar of Whiteby,
Newcastle-on-Tyne, embodies some of the thoughts that naturally arise
in the mind of the cultivated visitant:

    C hanged are the times and changed, alas, the guests!
    H ow changed from those who erst with gossip stored
    E ach day saw grouped about thy cheerful board!
    S till are their voices now, whose noisy jests
    H ave filled these rooms with laughter. Gathered here
    I n rare confusion Beau, and Wit and Sage,
    R ich, Poor and Spendthrift, Youth and fuller age
    E njoyed whilst yet they might thy festive cheer.

    C areless of censure each one told his tale,
    H eard the last scandal as he quaffed his ale.
    E ager to praise, they scrupled not to school,
    E njoyed the folly, but condemned the fool.
    S o lived they far removed from dulness dire,
    E schewed the commonplace and tuned the lyre.

Among the bygone guests with whose memory the Cheshire Cheese is
fragrant, not the least notable was the immortal author of “The
Deserted Village” and “The Vicar of Wakefield.” Indeed he was its
very near neighbour, for Goldsmith’s lodging was at No. 6 Wine
Office Court, nearly opposite the “Cheese,” and here he wrote “The
Vicar of Wakefield.” It was on Johnson’s first visit to supper here
with Goldsmith that Percy called for him on his way, and found him
dressed in a new suit of clothes and well-powdered wig. Noticing
Johnson’s unusual smartness, he heard from him the reason of it.
“Sir, Goldsmith is a great sloven, and justifies his disregard of
propriety by my practice. To-night I desire to show him a better
example.” Johnson’s house, where the Dictionary was compiled, was
within a minute’s walk, in Gough Square. Boswell does not record
any visits to the “Cheese,” but Boswell’s acquaintance with Johnson
began when Johnson was an old man, when he had given up the house in
Gough Square, and Goldsmith had long departed from Wine Office Court.
At the best, Boswell only knew Johnson’s life in widely separated
sections. Boswell was in Edinburgh while Johnson was in Bolt Court,
and it is certain Johnson wrote no diary for the benefit of his
biographer. Witnesses who were on the spot supply the deficiency.
Some of them Mr. Cyrus Jay, in a little book entitled, “The Law—What
I have Seen, Heard and Known,” published in 1868, states that he had
met. The book contains this inscription:

    TO THE
    LAWYERS AND GENTLEMEN
    WITH WHOM I HAVE DINED FOR MORE THAN
    HALF A CENTURY
    AT
    THE OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE TAVERN
    WINE OFFICE COURT, FLEET STREET
    THIS WORK
    IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
    BY THEIR OBEDIENT SERVANT
    CYRUS JAY

In his preface Mr. Jay says: “During the fifty-five years that I
have frequented the Cheshire Cheese Tavern ... there have been only
three landlords. When I first visited the house I used to meet
several very old gentlemen, who remembered Dr. Johnson, nightly at
the Cheshire Cheese; and they have told me, what is not generally
known, that the Doctor, whilst living in the Temple, always went to
the Mitre or the Essex Head; but when he removed to Gough Square and
Bolt Court he was a constant visitor at the Cheshire Cheese, because
nothing but a hurricane would have induced him to cross Fleet Street.”

Mr. Jay’s fifty-five years, from 1868, take us back to 1813, or
little more than a quarter of a century after the death of Johnson.
But who then was Mr. Jay, and what are his claims to credibility?
“I have heard,” says Dr. Birkbeck Hill, that indefatigable inquirer
into Johnsonian facts and dates, “a member of our (the Johnson)
club relate that, when he was a student of law, there used to be
pointed out to him in the Cheshire Cheese an old gentleman who,
day after day, was always to be found there, prolonging his dinner
by an unbroken succession of glasses of gin and water. It was as a
kind of awful warning of the depths to which a lawyer might sink,
that this toper was shown, and it was added in a whisper that he
was the son of Jay, of Bath. Jay, of Bath, is well-nigh forgotten
now, but during the first half of the present century his fame as a
preacher stood exceedingly high. It was Cyrus Jay, his son, who for
fifty-three years frequenting this ancient tavern, preserved and
handed down this curious tradition of Johnson. The landlord has told
me how, in his childhood, he used to hear in the distance the gruff
voice of the old gentleman as he came along Fleet Street, and how
sometimes he was sent to see Mr. Jay safe home to his chambers at 15
Serjeants’ Inn hard by. For most of his long life, port, that medium
liquor, neither like claret for boys nor brandy for heroes, but the
drink for men, had been his favourite beverage. A failing income
brought him down at last to gin and water. He used to comfort
himself by the reflection that he could get twice as drunk for half
the money. He dined in the tavern to the very end. One evening he
was led home to his lodgings, and within four-and-twenty hours he
was dead. He was the last frequenter of the Old Cheshire Cheese who
knew the men who had known Johnson. Mine host remembers a still older
guest, Dr. Pooley by name, a barrister, who died about 1856, at the
age of eighty. Night after night for many a long year he had dined
at half-past seven to the minute on a ‘follower,’ the end chop of
the loin. He, too, used to tell of the men of his younger days, who
boasted that they had often spent an evening there with Dr. Samuel
Johnson.”

[Illustration: “THE COSY CORNER” IN OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE.]

Another writer, Mr. Cyrus Redding, who went to live in Gough Square
in 1806, in his “Fifty Years’ Recollections, Literary and Personal,”
published in 1858, takes us a little further back. He says:

“I often dined at the Cheshire Cheese. Johnson and his friends,
I was informed, used to do the same, and I was told I should see
individuals who had met them there. This I found to be correct. The
company was more select than in later times. Johnson had been dead
about twenty years, but there were Fleet Street tradesmen who well
remembered both Johnson and Goldsmith in this place of entertainment.”

Mr. Cyrus Jay, deploring the loss of the Mitre, the Cock, and other
old taverns, remarks, “There still remains the Old Cheshire Cheese,
in Wine Office Court, which will afford the present generation, it
is hoped, for some years to come, an opportunity of witnessing the
kind of tavern in which our forefathers delighted to assemble for
refreshment.

“There was a Mr. Tyers, a silk merchant on Ludgate Hill, and Colonel
Laurence, who carried the colours of the 20th regiment at the battle
of Minden, ever fond of repeating that his regimental comrades bore
the brunt on that memorable day. The evening was the time we thus
met. There was also a sprinkling of lawyers, old demisoldes and men
of science; among the latter was a Mr. Adams, an optician, of Fleet
St.

“Colonel Laurence showed me Goldsmith’s tomb in the Temple
Churchyard; he was never tired of talking of his acquaintance with
the poet, whom he knew when Goldsmith, as well as Johnson, lived hard
by the Cheshire Cheese. I listened with eagerness to what these men
of other days told me. Tyers broke a leg, and was confined to his bed
for a long time, and the rubicund-cheeked Colonel passed the way of
all the earth in a year or two after I first became acquainted with
him. He used to speak of Goldsmith’s ordinary person, and told me the
poet never broke in upon the conversation when Johnson was talking.

“The left-hand room, entering the ‘Cheshire,’ and the table on the
extreme right upon entering that room, was the table occupied by
Johnson and his friends almost uniformly. This table and the room
are now as they were when I first saw them, having had the curiosity
to visit them recently. They were, and are still, as Johnson and his
friends left them in their time. Goldsmith sat at Johnson’s left
hand.” But the public room on the ground floor was not the only place
affected by Johnson and his friends. When they wished to retire from
the madding crowd a little room on another floor supplied all the
privacy they occasionally desired, and here to this day is carefully
preserved the chair from which the Doctor thundered.”




CHAPTER III

RELICS AND ART TREASURES OF “THE CHESHIRE CHEESE”

  “There is nothing which has yet been contrived by man, by which so
  much happiness is produced as by a good tavern or inn.”—JOHNSON.


About half-way up Fleet Street, on the right or northern side if we
are coming from Ludgate Circus, the sign of “The Cheshire Cheese”
meets the eye of the wayfarer, and intimates to him the near presence
of the famous hostelry. There are two approaches, the western by Wine
Office Court, the other by the passage way leading to the annexe. We
will take the western, by Wine Office Court, because up it have often
strolled side by side Dr. Johnson and Oliver Goldsmith, the latter
parting for a moment with his dictatorial friend at the portals of
“The Cheese” to go on to his lodgings a dozen yards further up the
court on the other side the way. The sign beneath which the Doctor
stands intimates to all and sundry that “The Cheshire Cheese” was
rebuilt in 1667, seven years after the glorious Restoration, on the
site of that older Cheshire Cheese, where Shakespeare, Ben Jonson
and many another Elizabethan wit were wont to quaff their sack amid
laughter and eager bandying of jest. We will leave the Doctor to
make for his favourite seat in the room on the left, while we enter
the bar. This is a delightful apartment in its tranquil reminder of
the past. Ranged round it are a number of valuable punch bowls, of
which we can imagine Mr. Pickwick if he were on a visit here took
elaborate and reverential note. They speak eloquently of countless
_noctes ambrosianæ_, when the wit and the liquor were alike of the
best. The bar of the Cheshire Cheese has seen them drained to the
last drop with effusive enthusiasm when the news of Blenheim, and
Oudenarde, and Ramilies arrived, or later for Dettingen and Minden.
We can imagine the punch was not without its tributory tears when
its patriotic customers suddenly learnt that Nelson had fallen in
the hour of victory, though there was nothing lachrymal to dilute
their jovial joy in the frequent triumphs of “The Iron Duke.” If the
old punch bowls could but speak! But the very air of the place is
redolent of the past, both storied and convivial, and eloquent for
him who but pauses to think and to recall.

One of the most touching things about “The Cheese” is the way in
which it treasures the memory of its old servants. “William” has
actually given his name to a room, and there over the fireplace of
the bar just opposite the door is his portrait, the portrait of
William Simpson, who commenced waiter at “Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese”
Chop-house in 1829. “This picture,” says the inscription below, “was
subscribed for by the gentlemen frequenting the Coffee Room, and
presented to Mr. Dolamore (the Landlord) to be handed down as an
heirloom to all future Landlords of ‘Ye old Cheshire Cheese,’ Wine
Office Court Fleet Street.” The name of the artist is unknown. It is
worth noting that in this inscription the room in which we stand is
called a Coffee Room. Its modern designation of “the bar” therefore
is of comparatively recent origin.

The two small oil paintings on either side this heirloom were painted
in 1883 by William Allen. One of them depicts the interior of the
old bar, the other its exterior. To the right of the fireplace is
a striking and important painting. It is a portrait, but it is not
certainly known of whom. Tradition varies, and while according to
some it is a portrait of Dean Swift, others maintain that here we
have the counterfeit presentment of the first proprietor of the house
after the Great Fire, Theophilus B. Cruneble. There are other objects
of interest in the room, particularly worth notice being the old
china and glass. Nor must we omit to mention the young ladies behind
the bar, but it is for the visitor to appraise their grace and charm.
Beauty draws the human heart in every generation, and the men of
Johnson’s day were no less susceptible to its appeal than are we. The
picture upstairs, near the “Grandfather’s Clock,” would have fired
their imaginations as readily as it does ours.

But now, turning from the bar over which Hebes of our twentieth
century so efficiently preside, we pass to the room opposite, and
immediately on the left of the passage way as we enter. This room
has not changed its character or its furniture for centuries. If Dr.
Johnson were to come in now and go by us to his corner seat there to
the right of the fireplace, he would find things essentially much as
he left them. If his ghost wanders about Fleet Street, it must be a
great relief to it to get, when it can, back safe into its unchanging
old haunt, out of reach of the structural revolutions which elsewhere
time has wrought.

As in the bar, the important picture in this room is that of
a waiter. It is a portrait of Henry Todd, as the inscription
informs us, who commenced waiter at the Olde Cheshire Cheese the
27th February, 1812. It was painted by Wageman, July, 1827, and
“subscribed for by the gentlemen frequenting the Coffee Room, and
presented to Mr. Dolamore (the landlord) in trust to be handed down
as an heirloom to all future landlords of the Old Cheshire Cheese,
Wine Office Court, Fleet Street.”

Two oil paintings by Seymour Lucas, R.A., of the dining-room, with
portraits of customers, will repay inspection, while above Dr.
Johnson’s old seat is an oil painting of the Lexicographer himself,
a copy of the famous portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds, now preserved
in the National Gallery. Underneath may be read the following
inscription:—“The Favourite Seat of Dr. Johnson. Born 18th Septr.,
1709. Died 13th Decr., 1784. In him a noble understanding and a
masterly intellect were united. With grand independence of character,
and unfailing goodness of heart, which won the admiration of his own
age and remain as recommendations to the reverence of posterity. ‘No,
Sir! there is nothing which has yet been contrived by man by which so
much happiness has been produced as by a good tavern.—JOHNSON.’”

Hard by are two interesting old prints, one of Dr. Johnson rescuing
Oliver Goldsmith from his landlady, the other of a literary party at
the house of Sir Joshua Reynolds. Then there is an oil painting of
a family group in which the Doctor is easily to be recognised. More
modern, but still well worthy of inspection, is an artist’s proof,
signed by the artist himself, of the well-known picture—“Toddy at
the Cheese.” This is the painter, Mr. Dendy Sadler’s own gift to
the house, the interior of whose dining-room he has so genially
portrayed. Noticeable adjuncts of the apartments also are two old
water-bottles, one of leather, the other of stone, and of what is
known as Godstone ware.

[Illustration: THE JOHNSONIAN CORNER.]

The old staircase is well worth careful attention, having stood
marvellously the test of time. If we ascend it we arrive at
the first floor and William’s room, to which an announcement on
the wainscot at the foot of the stairs served as a guide. It is
immediately on our left when we reach the landing, perpetuating with
its name the memory of Mr. Dolamore’s faithful old henchman. Its most
interesting feature is a second copy in oils of the portrait of Dr.
Johnson by Sir Joshua Reynolds, to which I have just made allusion.
But it is much more than a mere replica of the copy downstairs in the
dining-room. It is a copy, indeed, but a very old copy, and dates
back to the Doctor’s own time. It was painted in order that it might
adorn the room at “The Mitre,” in Chancery Lane, where the club
founded by Dr. Johnson first held its meetings. Dr. Johnson’s “Mitre”
has long since been pulled down, but the club he founded exists, and
meets several times a year in William’s room. Two prints next claim
our attention—a coloured one of Dr. Johnson’s House in Gough Square,
the other a book print of Dr. Johnson, who is also shown to us in a
framed wax bas-relief model.

About the room also are a number of sepia drawings of the various
parts of the house—the work of that accomplished artist, F. Cox—while
there are several pictures on the wall which serve to show that
the tastes of the frequenters of the “Cheese” are not limited to
literature and journalism. For example, we have “Roach, Perch and
Dace,” and “Salmon Trout” and “Trout,” by C. Foster, a coloured
print of steeple-chasing, a portrait of Lord Palmerston, engraved by
F. Holl from the painting by F. Grant; a landscape of considerable
merit by an unknown artist, and a view of Fleet Street, showing the
entrance to Wine Office Court. Very interesting too is a print of
the meeting of Dr. Johnson and Flora Macdonald in the Isle of Skye
in the year 1773. This valuable work was recently exhibited at the
Franco-British Exhibition of 1908 at Shepherd’s Bush.

Issuing from this room, which embalms the memory of “William,” we
must pause at the foot of the flight of stairs leading to the next
floor to admire a handsome old grandfather’s clock, which even in
Dr. Johnson’s time was venerable by reason of its years, as it
was almost certainly part of the furniture of “The Cheese” when
the hostelry was rebuilt after the Great Fire of 1667. It is not
impossible it was ticking off the flight of time when Hawkins and
other Elizabethan sea captains were harrying the warships of the
great Armada in its progress up the British Channel. Shakespeare and
Ben Jonson may have studied that ancient clock-face which would warn
them that it was desirable to cut short their pleasant revelry and
hasten to the theatre. We pass on with a lingering look, and the next
turn in the old staircase brings us to a private room, containing
one of the most valued treasures of the Cheshire Cheese, nothing
less than the original chair used by Dr. Johnson at the Mitre, the
old Chancery Lane tavern, patronised occasionally by the Doctor and
now pulled down. This chair was acquired by the proprietor of the
Cheshire Cheese, and sedulously protected from all accident and
injury. The better to ensure this end it is now enclosed in a glass
case. On the back of the chair is a medallion of Dr. Johnson with
the inscription—“Born Sept. 7th, 1709. Died Dec. 13th, 1784.” Copies
of the chair can be supplied to order in oak at £5 each, but the
medallion and inscriptions, which are perhaps modern, or at least
post-Johnsonian additions to the original chair, are not copied. A
notice card upon the seat of the chair announces to the visitor that
“This chair was in daily use by Dr. Samuel Johnson,” while below
follows the quotation:—“More regal in his state than many kings.”
Though he passed away when George Washington was in the zenith of his
renown after splendid epoch-making achievement in arms and diplomacy
and council, the memory of the great Doctor is as fresh and fragrant
as ever, as on the day when he last sat in the chair before us,
the oracle of a select company of wits and scholars. It is idle to
moralise further on this more than royal relic. Each intelligent
visitor, as he reverently contemplates it, will pursue his own line
of reflection.

Turning from the chair we find at the other end of the room a
glass-fronted cupboard, which contains many original samples of the
old willow pattern plate and also of the unique badge plate, which
has been in use in the house for many years. Here, too, are several
specimens of the old punch glasses, which have found favour with so
many generations of _convives_ of the Cheshire Cheese. The stranger
is not perhaps without a tremor of gastronomic emotion when the spoon
used for at least three generations, probably for a period of over
a century, in stirring _the_ pudding is pointed out to him. Hard by
on the walls of the room are seven old prints from Hogarth’s “Rake’s
Progress.”

The great artistic treasures of this room are, however, three
important paintings, which have recently been restored by Messrs.
William Marchant & Co., of the Goupil Gallery, 5 Regent Street.
The first, which looks down on the chair of Dr. Johnson in its
glass shrine, is an oil painting of a boy and dog. On the back of
the picture is written:—“David Boyle, aged 10.” “Ye 19th of July,
1691.” So that it was painted eighteen years before the birth of Dr.
Johnson. On the opposite wall is another oil painting, a still life
picture, attributed by competent critics to Peter Boel, who lived
from 1626 to 1680, and was a pupil of Snyders. The third of these
oil paintings is a figure picture, probably of “Diana,” by Charles
Le Brun, or the school (France, XVII. century).

In the smoking-room adjoining there is nothing of special interest
for visitors, since this apartment is mainly devoted to the smoking
of churchwarden pipes and to the consumption of “goes” of rack, cork,
and, above all, of Punch, for the right compounding of which Ye Old
Cheshire Cheese enjoys a reputation so deservedly high. Here take
place noteworthy arguments, conducted with much skill and logical
acumen by the regular customers, each in his own special chair, and
each with his own churchwarden pipe in his mouth, or held gracefully
poised to emphasise a rhetorical point. A case is provided in which
gentlemen may keep from harm the favourite pipes to which use and
wont have made them attached. In this room, too, the evening clubs
hold their meetings. The subject of “Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese Clubs”
is, however, dealt with elsewhere. Still attention may be drawn to
the fact that on the walls of the smoking-room are some interesting
pen and ink sketches and drawings relating to the clubs. It would
be unbecoming perhaps to omit mention of an engraving of “The Empty
Chair at Gadshill,” since it serves to remind us of the intimate
association of Charles Dickens with “Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese,” while
it suggests that other empty chair in the next room. Further, a pen
and ink drawing of the old bar downstairs, by Joseph Pennell, must
not be forgotten, any more than three Phil May sketches, the gift of
the Goupil Gallery.

[Illustration: DR. JOHNSON’S CHAIR.]

[Illustration: AN INCIDENT AT THE OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE.

“An interesting episode in the family history of the House.”

_By F. Cox._

(William’s Room in the distance.)]

At the foot of the staircase leading up to the apartments sacred to
the fair Hebes of the House a sepia drawing by F. Cox claims our
notice. It is entitled “An interesting episode in the family history
of the House.” A stalwart favourite of the bar is snatching
a kiss, while two lovely colleagues of his beautiful victim are
tip-toeing down these very stairs to see the fun, and one pretty
forehead has just reached the corner of the wainscoting. And now as
the smiling beauties to the right of the picture bar our further
progress, let us descend to the kitchen, where the most interesting
objects are the original coal range and coal grill, which have been
in use for over a hundred years. Possibly nowhere in the wide world
is there a gastronomic temple of greater renown or more worthy of it,
for here have always been cooked in huge copper boilers the famous
pudding, the fire being fed and the pudding tended throughout the
whole night previous to the solemn and regular introduction of this
mammoth delicacy to the longing gaze of its patrons. That is the
hour when the analytical observer might make valuable studies of the
watering mouth.

Dinners, by the way, are now served in the Annexe. This room has been
formed by roofing with glass what was originally a court-yard. It
contains amongst the rest two famous original prints by H. Bunbury—“A
City Hunt” and “Hyde Park, 1780.” Other interesting prints are
“Destruction of the Bastile, July 14, 1789,” after a painting by H.
Singleton, and a line engraving by James Heath from a painting by F.
Wheatley of “The Riot in Broad Street on the 17th of June, 1773.”
Here also is a cabinet containing various articles which may be
purchased by visitors. The price list may be conveniently appended
here. It runs as follows:—

      O.C.C. WARE, ETC.                 Each
                                     _s._  _d._
  Three-handle MUGS, silver mounted   50    0
  Three-handle MUGS                   10    0
  Two-handle MUGS                      7    6
  One-handle MUGS                      2    0
  One-handle MUGS, silver mounted     21    0
  Cream Jugs                           1    0

  Sugar Basins                         1    0
  Mustard Pots                         1    0
  Salt Cellars                         1    0
  Pepper Pots                          1    0
  Tea Pots                               —

                                       Large.      Small.
                                     _s._  _d._  _s._  _d._
  Badged Willow Pattern Plates        1     0     0     8
  Badged Willow Pattern Dishes        1     0     0     8

              POST CARDS.
  No. 1 Series         6d. per packet.
  No. 2 Series         6d. per packet.
  Coloured Interior          1d. each.
  Views of the House       6d. and 1s.

The above is a fairly complete inventory of the relics and art
treasures of the Cheshire Cheese, that ancient hostelry which
has become a place of pilgrimage for all in the wide realms of
Anglo-Saxondom who cherish the memory of a unique figure in the
literary history of the English-speaking peoples. Much has been said
and written of the great men of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and
eighteenth centuries who have eaten good fare and waxed honestly
merry within the precincts of the Cheshire Cheese, but little of
the men of note of this generation and the preceding one who have
at one time or another been its guests. There are few distinguished
Englishmen who have not partaken of its hospitality, and few persons
of eminence, whether hailing from the far Antipodes or from the great
country over which floats the Stars and Stripes, who would deem a
visit to England complete if due homage to the memory of the great
Lexicographer in the Johnsonian shrine in Wine Office Court had not
been paid. There is nothing to compare with this worship of the
mighty literary monarch, unless it is to be found in that of which
Shakespeare is the centre, which has made of Stratford-on-Avon the
other Mecca of Anglo-Saxondom.

[Illustration: CHESHIRE COURT AT SIDE OF “OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE.”]




CHAPTER IV

MR. JOSEPH PENNELL AND LADY COLIN CAMPBELL ON “THE CHEESE”

    Hard by there is the Cheshire Cheese,
          A famous tap.—T. HOOD.


In the last chapter no mention was made of the fact that in 1887
a remarkable picture of the Cheshire Cheese by Mr. Seymour Lucas,
R.A., was exhibited at the Royal Academy, since it is not among the
art treasures of the house. It can, however, not be passed by, since
Mr. Seymour Lucas and the Cheshire Cheese are mutual friends. We
will therefore quote here the description given of the picture by
a well-known London evening paper. To Mr. Dendy Sadler’s picture,
“Toddy at the Cheshire Cheese,” allusion has already been made.

[Illustration: “THE WAY IN.”]

The _Pall Mall Gazette_ of March 29, 1887: “It represents a scene in
the Old Cheshire Cheese inn, and is entitled ‘The Latest Scandal.’
In one corner of the quaint old room, on the bench which is still
pointed out as the place where Dr. Johnson used to sit, we see a
typical group of the wits of the period. Some wear powder, while
others have the full dark wigs of an older fashion still. One of
the group, in the uniform of the Guards, is relating the latest
scandal to the rest, and pointing over his shoulder towards two
young beaux, who stand by the fireside. One of these wears his
right arm in a sling, and has evidently come to grief in a duel on
the previous night. He and his friend are mightily disconcerted to
discover that their escapade has become the talk of the town, and
that it is affording vast amusement to this group of scandal-mongers.”

What Mr. Seymour Lucas and Mr. Dendy Sadler have so admirably
portrayed for us with the brush, an American writer of distinction
has both described with his pen and illustrated with his pencil
in the pages of _Harper’s Weekly_. In a November number of that
periodical, in 1887, Mr. Joseph Pennell writes as follows:—

“On my first coming to London, I had fortified myself, not with a
course of English history, but by re-reading ‘Pickwick.’ My first
Sunday morning, about one o’clock, I found myself in Chancery
Lane outside the entrance to Lincoln’s Inn, in the company of the
proverbial solitary policeman and convivial cat. On my asking the
policeman where in the world I could get something to eat—as it is
well known one must starve in London on Sunday before one and after
three—he gave me the inevitable answer, ‘Down to the bottom, first
to your left, under the lamp, up the passage, and there you are!’
After he had repeated these mysterious directions two or three times,
and had found me hopelessly ignorant of his meaning, he did what
I have very seldom known a London policeman to do—a proof of his
loneliness; he walked to the end of Chancery Lane with me, and there
being no one in Fleet Street, pointed out the sign of the Cheshire
Cheese.... A push at the door, and I have passed into another world.
I was in a narrow hall, at the far end of which was a quaint bar,
where, framed in by small panes, were two very pretty, but I cannot
say fascinating barmaids—I never could be fascinated by the ordinary
English barmaid. Suddenly a waiter with a very short nose came out of
another room and screamed up the stairs: ‘Cotherum steak. Boatherum
foozlum mash. Fotherum coozlum, botherum steak!’ and then remarked to
me: ‘Lunch, sir? Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. What can I get you, sir?
Steak, sir; chop, sir; kidney, sir; potatoes, sir, cooked in their
jackets, sir? Yes, sir; thank you, sir.’ Then up the stairs he added:
‘Underdone steak one!’ Then to me again: ‘Walk in, sir. Take a seat,
sir. Paper, sir? _Lloyd’s_, sir? _Reynolds’_, sir? Yes, sir.’...

“I had begun to look around me. I found I had stumbled on just
what I had determined to make a hunt for. I was in one of the
greenbaize-curtained boxes into which Mr. Pickwick was always
dropping under the guidance of Sam Weller, whose ‘knowledge of London
was extensive and peculiar.’ Unless you have a Sam Weller at your
elbow you will not very easily find the Cheshire Cheese, the last
of the London chop-houses, even though it is in Baedeker. In the
opposite corner was, not Mr. Pickwick, but one of those respectable
shabby old gentlemen you never see outside of London. The waiter
asked him in the same confidential tone, ‘if he would not have a
half-bitter! if he would not like to see yesterday’s _Times_? A most
interestin’ article in it, sir, Mr. Price, sir.’ Then Mr. Price’s
half-bitter came in a dented old pewter pot, and along with it an
exaggerated wine-glass; and Mr. Price held the pewter in the air, and
a softly murmuring stream flowed from the one into the other. Beyond
the box I was in I saw other hard straight-backed seats, and between
them other most beautifully clean, white cloth-covered tables, at all
of which were three or four rather quiet and sedate, but after their
manner sociable, Englishmen, everybody seeming to know everybody
else in the place. Everything seemed happy, even to the cat purring
on the hearth, and the brass kettle singing on the hob. Perhaps I
should except the restless waiter, who, when anyone came in, rushed
to the bottom of the stairs and gave his unearthly yell. Soon down
the same stairs came the translation of the yell in the shape of the
steak I had ordered, and with it the potatoes in their jackets, all
on old blue willow-ware plates.

“‘Your steak, sir. Yes, sir. Anything else, sir? Napkin, sir? Oh,
serviette! Yes, sir. All Americans like them, sir.’

“And so I found for the first time that napkins and bread, freely
bestowed in decent restaurants at home, are in England looked upon as
costly luxuries.[1]

... “I have returned again and again to the Cheshire Cheese, and
have, moreover, tried to induce others to go there with me. For if
the place is not haunted, as it is said to be, by the shades of
Ben Jonson and Herrick, of Samuel Johnson and Boswell, the waiter
is perfectly willing, for a consideration, to point out to you
the stains of their wigs on the wall. It is certain that Dickens,
Forster, Tom Hood, Wilkie Collins, and many other worthies did
frequent it, while Sala periodically puffs it, and a host of other
lights have written about it. In my own small way I have endeavoured
to lead some modern junior novelists and poets there, to show them
how near they could come to some of the great masters whom they
apparently worship so thoroughly. But on the only occasion when
I succeeded in placing one probably in the seat of Goldsmith or
Herrick, he sniffed at the chops and remarked that if Johnson had had
a napkin it would have been better for his personal appearance.

“I hardly know myself what is the attraction of the place, for
you can only[2] get chops and steaks, kidneys and sausages, or on
Saturdays a gigantic pudding, to eat your money’s worth of which
you must have the appetite of a Gargantua, or, on Shrove Tuesdays,
pancakes. If you should happen to want anything else, you would
probably get the answer which Mr. Sala says was given to a friend of
his who asked (at the Cock) for a hard boiled egg with his salad: ‘A
hegg! If Halbert Hedward ’imself wuz to cum ’ere he couldn’t ’ave
a hegg.’ Whoever really cares to see the last of the Old London
chop-houses, let him, when next in London, look up the sign of YE
OLDE CHESHYRE CHEESE.”

Not out of place, after the remarks of Mr. Pennell, will be found
a vivacious description of a dinner at the “Cheese,” given by Lady
Colin Campbell, writing under the pseudonym of “Ina” in the _World_
of August 31, 1892. Its “go” and high spirits render an apology for
quoting at length unnecessary. This clever lady writes as follows:—

“It is August, London is empty, and we are bored; yet dine we
must somewhere, and where to go is the difficulty. Everybody one
knows is either at Homburg or Cowes, so we cannot possibly go to
the Savoy or the Amphitryon. There is nothing more utterly stupid
than to visit the haunts of society after society has left, and to
find them peopled by the unknown—good creatures in their way, no
doubt, but not exactly _des nôtres_; not fashionably dressed enough
to admire, nor ridiculously dressed enough to be amusing, and the
affairs of whom we cannot discuss, for the simple reason that we
know nothing about them, good, bad, or indifferent. How strange
it is to think that only a short time ago no lady would ever have
dreamed of dining at a London restaurant! Then a few somewhat fast
people set the fashion of supping at some public place instead of
their own homes; and now there is probably no inhabitant of Mayfair
or Belgravia, with any pretensions to smartness, who has not at some
time or other either dined or supped at one of the many fashionable
cafés which have sprung up in various parts of the town, and have
become for a time the rage, only to be displaced by some newer,
more pretentious, and more expensive restaurant, to which people
flock, quite as much to see and discuss each other as they do to
discuss the delicacies provided for them by the latest celebrated
_chef_ imported direct from Paris. But, as I said before, dine we
must somewhere; and dining at a restaurant being depressing, and
dining at home dull, we are just turning over in our minds what we
had best do under the circumstances, when there comes a loud peal
at the front door bell. We all start up, and”—and, to abridge Lady
Colin’s narrative, three ladies and three gentlemen find themselves
in Fleet Street “in front of a little narrow alley, suggestive (to
me) of robbery and murder. Here we alight, and, with many apologies
for the shabbiness of the entrance, our host conducts us—by the
back way by mistake—into a dining place. A flare of unshaded gas
lights up a small, old-fashioned room, the floor of which is covered
with sawdust. The ceiling is white, with projecting cross-beams,
and at one side of the room is a long oak table, at which Johnson,
Goldsmith, and a few other choice spirits, were wont to sit and feed;
and here, it is said, originated the well-known riddle about the
number of beefsteaks it would take to reach the moon. All along one
side of the room are wooden partitions, exactly like old-fashioned
pews, with hard, cushionless sets. One of our party says, as she
sits down, that she feels as if she were in church; we devoutly
wished she would _behave_ a little more as though she were there,
long before the evening was over; but reaction having set in, we
are all, I fear, in a terribly frivolous humour, not by any means
in keeping with the solemn respectability of our surroundings, for
we are told that this chop-house has been in existence ever since
the year 1667, and is no ephemeral mushroom-house of the hour, to be
sought out one day and forgotten the next.... Our pew just holds six
comfortably, and we sit down three and three, opposite each other,
on either side of a very narrow table covered with a spotless white
cloth. We have willow-pattern plates, large and hot for the meat, and
small and cold, each with a pat of butter on it, for our potatoes.
First, we have thick slices of hot ham, the lean tender and pink and
the fat succulent, with an immense dish of the most delicious peas
I ever ate, and young potatoes served in their jackets. Anyone who
has tasted a fresh-run salmon which has been green-kippered, and has
compared it with the hard, salt fish that is cured for the London
market, will appreciate the difference between an ordinary ham and
one that is prepared for immediate consumption. These Yorkshire hams
were not intended for keeping, and, as the cook afterwards informed
us, were all eaten up in a day. I could easily have believed her
if she had said one was eaten up at every meal, judging by the
thickness of the slices to which we were helped, and the amount we
were supposed to eat of them. The next dish is a point steak, rosy
without being _saignant_, accompanied by fresh dishes of young peas
and potatoes.... Our somewhat eccentric dinner is brought to a close
by a bowl of rum punch, accompanied by six long churchwarden pipes
and a glass full of bird’s-eye tobacco.”


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Serviettes are now provided as a matter of course.

[2] A more extensive menu is now provided.




CHAPTER V

ABOUT THE PUDDING

    Now, good digestion wait on appetite
    And health on both.—SHAKESPEARE.


“How do you make it?” asked a fair American of the proprietor.

The answer is not recorded, for in the manner of making chiefly lies
the speciality of the Old Cheshire Cheese. The hand of the proprietor
himself compounds the ingredients in a secret room, secure from the
gaze of even his most inquisitive attendants.

Yet when we look on the immense bowl from which sixty or seventy
people are to be fed, one cannot wonder at the lady’s desire to know
how such a Brobdingnagian dish could be so exquisitely prepared.

The proportions of the bowl are emblematic of the profusion with
which its contents are dispensed, and even Gargantua would find
himself vanquished in presence of the “Cheese” hospitality.

Old “William,” for many years the head-waiter, could only be seen in
his real glory on Pudding Days. He used to consider it his duty to
go round the tables insisting that the guests should have second or
third, ay, and with wonder be it spoken, fourth helpings.

“Any gentleman say pudden?” was his constant query; and his habit was
not broken when a crusty customer growled:

“No _gentleman_ says pudden.”

William either never saw the point or disdained to make reply.

The narrow limits of this volume are all too small for a complete
collection of the prose and verse written in praise of the pudding. A
few examples must serve.

In “Ye Lay of Ye Lost Minstrel,” printed in the _West London
Observer_ (April, 1890), are a number of verses in praise of the
“Cheese,” by Mr. William Henderson. We give the following extract
from his poem:—

    If you’d dine at your ease
    Try “Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese.”
    At this famous resort
    In the Wine Office Court
    Kickshaws, entrées or slops
    You’ll not get, but the chops
    Devil’d kidneys and steaks
    He will say who partakes
    Are all second to none—
    To a turn they are done!
    But the pudding!—oh my!
    You look on with a sigh,
    As it comes piping hot
    From the cauldron or pot—
    Oh the savour, the taste,
    Of its lining, its paste!
    How it wells! how it swells!
    In its bosom there dwells
    Food for gods, meat for men,
    Who resort to Moore’s den.

A parody by the same author will appeal to the sentiment of those who
scorn a foreign yoke. It is inscribed to Beaufoy A. Moore, and was
published by Mr. J. H. Wadsworth, of Boston (U.S.A.):—


YE PUDDING’S REQUIEM

AIR: DEATH OF NELSON.

    We sought “The Cheese,” with thirst and hunger prest,
    And own we love the pudding day the best.
    But no one quarrels with the chops cook’d here,
    Or steaks, when wash’d down by Old English beer!

        ’Twas on Saint Andrew’s day,
        Our way thro’ Fleet Street lay;
          We sniff’d the pudding then!
        We scorn’d all foreign fare,
        True British food was there,
          To “cut and come agen.”
        Our landlord carved with manner grave,
        Brave portions to each guest he gave,
          Nor thought he of his booty,
          Nor thought he of his booty.
        Along the boards the signal ran,
        “Charlie” expects that ev’ry man
          Will pay and do his duty,
          Will pay and do his duty.

        And now the waiters pour
        Prime “Burton” foaming o’er
          “Old William” marks his prey!
        No tips that waiter claimed,
        Long be that waiter famed,
          Who smiles and makes it pay!
        Not dearly was that pudding bought,
        For ev’ry hungry Briton sought
          A “follow” from that beauty,
          A “follow” from that beauty.
        With plate on plate each waiter ran;
        “Charlie” confessed that ev’ry man
          That day had done his duty,
          That day had done his duty.

        At last the fatal sound,
        Which spread dismay around,
    The pudding’s off, the pudding’s off at last!
        “The vict’ry’s on your side,
        The day’s your own” Moore cried!
          “I serve and have to fast!
        However large that pudding be,
        No scrap is ever left for me!
          Content I do my duty!
          Content I do my duty!
        For to complain was ne’er my plan.”
        Let all confess that Moore, good man,
          Has ever done his duty,
          Has ever done his duty!

  1890.      W.H.

The “Cheese” pudding has a far-extended sphere of influence. It
boasts a clientèle much more numerous than are the actual frequenters
of the ancient hostelry. Hundreds are sent out every year to
all parts of London, and, indeed, England. Some even have found
their way to the United States, imported direct from “The Cheese”
by enthusiastic Americans. The following extract from the _Court
Journal_ of April 4, 1891, describes the misadventures of one owing
to the operation of the McKinley Act: “The London lark pudding is
renowned in many lands. The travelled American speaks with rapture
of that lark pudding he partook of in Fleet Street. Mr. Burras, of
New York, requested that such a lark pudding should be sent out to
him from London, so that the stay-at-home ones might partake of
the British culinary luxury. The delicacy duly arrived; the guests
who were to aid Mr. Burras in eating it were duly invited—all was
ready, indeed, when an unexpected difficulty arose. The Customs House
authorities declined to give it up until the question as to what duty
‘lark pudding’ was liable to was settled. The McKinley Bill does not
mention lark pudding. It takes cognisance of canned goods and potted
meats, certainly; but larks in a pudding were unclassified, and
they said it did not come under the head of manufactured articles,
because it was food in a natural state. A week has elapsed while
the authorities have been debating the point, and in the meantime
the lark pudding is most probably turning sour, and Mr. Burras
and his friends dancing with indignation. More trouble will ensue
over this lark pudding, no doubt, than did upon the opening of the
four-and-twenty-blackbird pie of yore! It may cause the establishment
of Free Trade in the States.”

It is satisfactory to be able to state that the pudding eventually
passed the Customs House none the worse for its detention. The guests
were eloquent in its praise, and several of them have since visited
England merely to track the pudding to the place of its nativity.

[Illustration: THE BAR.]




CHAPTER VI

THE BAR

    If on thy theme I rightly think,
    There are five reasons why men drink:
    Good wine, a friend, because I’m dry,
    At least, I should be by-and-bye,
    Or any other reason why.—H. ALDRICH.


The bar of the “Cheese” is unique amongst the bowers of Boniface
in the metropolis. It has no equal and no rival. “Here,” says the
_Sportsman_ of March 30, 1887, “gather poets, painters, lawyers,
barristers, preachers, journalists, stockbrokers, musicians, town
councillors, and vestrymen, with just a _soupçon_ of sporting
celebrities, and a decided dash of the impecunious ‘Have beens.’
The latter represent in the ‘Cheese’ colony the Irish division in
Parliament. Many of our most eminent journalists, legal luminaries,
and successful merchants have been patrons of the Old Cheshire Cheese
in the days when it was to them club, discussion forum, and even
home.”

The “Cheese” bar resembles no other in London. The customers are
unique, and the names of their drinks are peculiar. The simplest and
amplest is “whisky,” and that means Scotch whisky. No old customer of
the “Cheese” would ever think of asking for “Scotch.” If anyone dares
to say “Scotch,” he is marked down at once as one not yet inured
to the ways of the bar. On the other hand, neither must he whisper
“Irish”—certainly not! If he knows his “Cheese” he asks for “Cork,”
and if he says “Irish” he is an ignoramus. Then who would mention
“gin?” The word is absolutely vulgar, and should be confined to the
East End and Mrs. Harris. No, no! the cognoscente calls for “rack”—an
odd name, which may be meant to suggest the state of mind of the
drinker on the morrow, or it may be a mere contraction of arrack.

Punch, a mysterious and delectable compound, we had better not order
in the bar, its consumption is so much more pleasant upstairs; but
there is no reason why we should not admire the punch bowls, and
having considered them and studied the portrait of an erstwhile
waiter over the fireplace as much as they deserve, we probably turn
about, and, as the eyes become accustomed to the darkness, find
ourselves confronted with the way out. But don’t go for a while.
You would probably like to see somebody in the bar. Adequately to
people the bar would task the pencil of a Hogarth, the pen of a
Thackeray. That more genial Hogarth of our time, the late Phil May,
has indeed done it exceedingly well in his “Parson and the Painter.”
But the human constituents of the bar’s society vary with the hour
of the day. In the morning the journalistic element predominates.
But it is when night begins to fall that the life of the bar is at
its brightest. Then the blinds are drawn, the gas is lighted, and
the full orchestra tunes up. The Cheeseites are in their glory, and
what might be copy for a dozen comic papers elicits a little passing
laughter and then is forgotten. When the sparkle has fled from the
champagne, who can restore it? Here, however, are a few fragments of
typical conversation.

The bar is crowded, and floating in the ambient air one detects
the rich voice of a Scotch poet who is being taken to task for his
grammar.

[Illustration: “THE WAY OUT.”]

“It’s maybe not English at present, Mr. Bluggs; but wha maks your
English? It’s your Shakespeares, your Multons, an _Me_!”

From another part of the room comes the voice of an Englishman
somewhat at a disadvantage among Irish and Scotch intonations of rich
variety.

“Of course the Scotch say they speak better English than the English.
I remember I once had a short engagement on an Edinburgh paper. When
about to leave ‘Auld Reekie’ there was a little _deoch-an-dorus_,
and some fifteen of the fellows came to wish me God-speed. They were
from some fifteen different parts of Scotland, and after certain
formalities in the way of hot toddy my Scotch friends brought up
the eternal question of their immaculate English. ‘It may be as you
say,’ I interposed, ‘but why do you speak it with fifteen different
accents?’ Had them there, ha! ha!”

Irish Dramatist (discussing tours, etc.)—“Did I hear you say Stony
Stratford? I was once there, and no wonder they called it Stony
Stratford, for I was never so bitten with bugs in my life.”[3]

Genial Advertising Manager—“I hear that poor old Mac’s dead” (general
sorrow and display of handkerchiefs). (Enter poor old Mac—silence
falls on the company.)

Poor old Mac—“Good evening, Miss S——, I haven’t seen you for a long
time.”

Miss S.—“Was it very hot where you have come from?”

Funny Man—“Why, Jack, you seem to believe in a lot of things nobody
else believes in”—(then, as a clincher)—“I suppose you believe in the
transmigration of souls!”

Solemn Man—“I do—and so do you. You must feel you were an ass when
you lent me that half-sovereign six months ago.”

Socialistic Journalist (to admiring friends)—“Have you read my
articles in the _X Y Gazette_? No? Well, read them, and you will
see that I am the second, if not the first, among the teachers of
humanity. Nobody, for at least eighteen hundred years, has taught as
I have taught.”

Waiter, suddenly entering the bar—“Oh, I beg your pardon, but you did
not pay for that steak you had in the room.”

Socialistic Journalist—“Pay for it! Not likely! It was from the
beginning as much my steak as Charlie Moore’s. Now it is more mine
than his. Pay? Base is the slave that pays.”

Racing Journalist—“Jones is a good writer, but he will never set the
Thames on fire.”

Impecunious Reporter—“I wish he would, for it’s very cold, and I have
to sleep on the Embankment.”

The story goes that on one occasion there was some little
misunderstanding at the bar; but misunderstandings are of the rarest,
and this one has become legendary. The account which reached me ran
something after this manner:—

Great Sub-Editor (with back to fire)—“_You’re_ not a freemason.”

Great Reporter—“I am.”

G. S.-E.—“Why, I’ve been making masonic signs to you for the last
half-hour.”

G. R.—“Do you call me a——?”

G. S.-E.—“I do.”

G. R.—“Then——” (and they roll together on the floor).

Head waiter (rushing in)—“What’s this? What’s this about?”

Manageress—“Only two gentlemen making a few masonic signs under the
table.”

Of course, as a rule, harmony prevails in the “Cheese,” and “chaff”
abounds without physical threshing, for the _habitués_ love the
ancient hostelry and themselves too much to make the place a
bear-garden.

To quote again from the _Sportsman_:—

“There is a sense of comfort and veneration about the place which
constitutes an absolute charm. There is something homely and out of
the common in its sawdust-coated floors, with uneven boards and great
gaping ‘chinks.’ The fireplaces are huge and commodious, capable of
holding a hundredweight of coal at a time. These said fireplaces, by
the way, have much to answer for in legions of broken resolutions
to be home at six. On a cold winter’s day, when their genial warmth
penetrates every portion of the room, and the merry flames dance and
leap after each other up the capacious chimney space, a man listens
to the howling wind without, or hears the rain pattering on the paved
courts, and he says, says he, ‘The old woman may be cross, or the
mater may scold; but we don’t kill a sheep every day, and—just one
more, James, and I will catch the seven.’ Those wicked fireplaces,
the huge singing kettle, the cosy recesses, and the seductive perfume
of toddy have indeed much to answer for.”


FOOTNOTES:

[3] This _non sequitur_ has already appeared in print.




CHAPTER VII.

CLUB LIFE AT THE “CHEESE”

    The feast of reason and the flow of soul.—POPE.


One of the most interesting features of the “Cheese” is its club
life. It is not the stately and withal solemn life of the modern
West-end club, but it is the social and intensely human life of the
club as Johnson, Burke, Reynolds, understood it. When the Doctor, Sir
Joshua, and some others established “The Club” in 1764, the members
were to meet once a month and take supper, passing their evening in
witty discourses.

At the “Old Cheshire Cheese” the Johnsonian tradition is naturally
strong; it pervades the whole place, and all the clubs which hold
their regular or occasional meetings there endeavour, as much as our
less heroic days will allow, to emulate the example of the giants of
the days gone by.

The following is a complete list of the clubs actually in existence
at the present time:—The Johnson Club, founded about 25 years;
Sawdust Club, founded 1906; Ye Punchbowlers; the Mitre Club, founded
November, 1903; “Ourselves,” founded 1897; St. Dunstan’s, founded
1790; Rump Steak Club; the Dickens Club.

The following further details regarding the Cheshire Cheese Clubs of
the past as well as the present may be found not without interest.
The place of honour is given to—


THE JOHNSON CLUB.

This club is composed of many men eminent in literature and art,
or distinguished in other ways. The club, which is literary and
social, and is restricted to thirty-one members, was founded about
twenty-five years ago. The members bind themselves to sup together
annually on or about December 13, the anniversary of the Doctor’s
death, but various other meetings are held throughout the year.
The constitution of the club is thus described by Dr. George
Birkbeck Hill, the well-known editor of the latest and best edition
of “Boswell.” “We are,” he says (in the _Atlantic Monthly_ of
January, 1896), “in strict accordance with the great Lexicographer’s
definition, ‘an assembly of good fellows meeting under certain
conditions’; the conditions being that we shall do honour to the
immortal memory of Dr. Samuel Johnson by supping together four times
a year, and by swallowing as much beefsteak pudding, punch, and
tobacco smoke as the strength of each man’s constitution admits. A
few of the weaker brethren—among whom unhappily I am included—whose
bodily infirmity cannot respond to the cheerful Johnsonian cry,
‘Who’s for poonsh?’ do their best to play their part by occasionally
reading essays on Johnsonian subjects, and by seasoning their talk
with anecdotes and sayings of the great Doctor. We are tolerated
by the jovial crew, for they see that we mean well, and are as
‘clubbable’ as nature allows. OUR FAVOURITE HAUNT IS THE OLD
CHESHIRE CHEESE, THE ONLY TAVERN IN FLEET STREET LEFT UNCHANGED by
what Johnson called that ‘fury of innovation’ which, beginning with
Tyburn and its gallows-tree, has gradually transformed London. The
Mitre—‘where he loved to sit up late’; where he made Boswell’s head
ache, not with the port wine, but with the sense he put into it;
where, at their first supper, he called to him with warmth, ‘Give me
your hand, I have taken a liking to you’; where, nearly a century
later, Hawthorne, in memory of the two men, dined ‘in the low,
sombre coffee-room’—the Mitre has been rebuilt.

“The Cock, most ancient of taverns, has followed its ‘plump
head-waiter’ along the road of mortality, although, fortunately, its
fittings and furniture are still preserved with the house which,
under the same name, has risen on the other side of the street. THE
OLD CHESHIRE CHEESE STANDS AS IT STOOD IN THE DAYS WHEN GOLDSMITH
USED TO PASS ITS SIDE DOOR on his way up the dark entry to his
lodgings in Wine Office Court. The jolly host who owns the freehold
can show title-deeds going back almost to the time of the Great Fire
of London.

“There, on the ground floor, we meet our ‘Prior’ sitting on a bench,
above which is set in the wall a brass tablet bearing the following
inscription:—

  “‘THE FAVOURITE SEAT OF
  DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.
  _Born September 18, 1709; Died December 13, 1784._

  “‘In him a noble understanding and a masterly intellect were
  united to great independence of character and unfailing goodness
  of heart, which won the admiration of his own age, and remain as
  recommendations to the reverence of posterity.

  “‘No, sir! there is nothing which has yet been contrived by
  man, by which so much happiness has been produced as by a good
  tavern.—JOHNSON.’

“In this same room, with its floor as ‘nicely sanded’ as when
Goldsmith knew it, our club gathers from time to time; here,
undisturbed in our thoughts by a single modern innovation except the
gas, we sup on one of those beefsteak puddings for which the Cheshire
Cheese has been famous from time immemorial. So vast is it in all
its glorious rotundity that it has to be wheeled in on a table; it
disdains a successor in the same line, and itself alone satisfies
forty hungry guests. ‘A magnificent hot apple pie stuck with bay
leaves,’ our second course, recalls the supper with which Johnson
‘celebrated the birth of the first literary child of Mrs. Lennox,
the novelist, when at five in the morning his face still shone with
meridian splendour though his drink had been only lemonade.’[4] The
talk is of the liveliest; from time to time toasts are drunk and
responded to.”

The centenary of the death of Dr. Johnson was celebrated in December,
1884, and the _Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News_ of the 20th of
that month thus refers to the Doctor’s connection with the ancient
hostelry:—“Whoever has heard of the grand old Doctor knows well that
the greater part of his life was passed between Ludgate Hill and
Temple Bar, and that the most interesting portion of it revolved
about Gough Square. There seems to be little doubt that while he
lived here, the Old Cheshire Cheese tavern was, as is claimed for it,
the haunt which he most favoured, and where much of that sledgehammer
wisdom was coaxed forth or teased forth, which Boswell has recorded
that, as Macaulay put it, the memory of Johnson might keep alive the
fame of his works.”

Many notable men have sat down at the Johnson centenary dinners in
the Cheshire Cheese. At that held on December 13, 1894, for example,
the chair was taken by Mr. Augustine Birrell, Q.C., M.P., then most
popularly known as the author of “Obiter Dicta,” but subsequently to
become President of the Board of Education and later Chief Secretary
for Ireland in a Liberal Government. From the _Sketch_ of December
19, which devoted to this particular festivity a page and half of
illustrated literary matter, is taken the following extract:—“The
most interesting figure of the evening was undoubtedly Mr. Dobson.
His health was proposed just in such a way as it must have been in
the days when men of letters indited odes to one another.” Then
followed the reading of gentle imitations of Mr. Dobson’s style, but
exigency of space precludes our quoting more than a couple of stanzas
from a delightful perversion of “The Ladies of St. James’s”:—

    The Journalists of Fleet Street
      Have precious little cash,
    They put their all in papers
      Which swiftly go to smash;
    But Publishers, my Publishers,
      Sit twirling of their thumbs
    While sweated clerks with ledgers
      Tot up colossal sums.

    The Journalists of Fleet Street
      While taking of their ease,
    Invoke the frequent tankard
      That haunts the Cheshire Cheese;
    But Publishers, my Publishers,
      As epicures enjoy
    The wines of Mr. Nicols,
      And soups of the Savoy.


THE RHYMERS’ CLUB.

Another club which affected the stern, uncushioned comforts of the
“Cheese” was known as the Rhymers’ Club, and we betray no secret
when we give the names of the members, for are they not written in
the book of their poetic deeds? In this book, published through
Elkin Mathews in 1892, the composition of the club is thus recorded:
Ernest Dowson, Edwin J. Ellis, G. A. Greene, Lionel Johnson, Richard
Le Gallienne, Victor Plarr, Ernest Radford, Ernest Rhys, T. W.
Rolleston, Arthur Symons, John Todhunter, W. B. Yeats.

When such sweet singers meet, it may well be believed that the night
was ambrosial, care and the world were banished, and the contests of
the “Cheese” and of the “Mermaid”—in miniature, it is no discourtesy
to say—live again, as Mr. Rhys sings:

    As once Rare Ben and Herrick
      Set older Fleet Street mad,
    With wit not esoteric,
    And laughter that was lyric,
      And roystering rhymes and glad.
    As they, we drink defiance
      To-night to all but Rhyme,
    And most of all to Science
    And all such skins of lions
      That hide the ass of time.

A very considerable poet and proseman, Mr. John Davidson, a
Scotchman, by the way, from the vicinity of Paisley, in his work,
“A Full and True Account of the Wonderful Mission of Earl Lavender,
which Lasted One Night and One Day, with a History of the Pursuit
of Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm, by Mrs. Scamler and Maud Emblem,”
brings two of his characters, Mr. Gurdon and Sir Harry Emblem, into
the “Cheese” in a condition which would spell ruin to the landlord
were it generally adopted. The two gentlemen had spent some £40 in
eight days, and now they are “on the rocks” in a Strand restaurant.
But foreigners have hard hearts, and so the delightful couple find
their way to the Cap and Bells, which every Fleet Streeter will
recognise as the Cheshire Cheese. They order supper, and, though
unprepared to pay, are prepared to justify their deeds. They were
quite unconventional in the matter of settlement of accounts; they
were financially naked, yet they were not ashamed. Fortunately for
the landlord, it happens that on this night the Guild of Prosemen
(oh, sarcastic Mr. Davidson!), otherwise the Rhymers’ Club, are
holding their meeting, and one of the members, acting more like
an impulsive poet than a mere proseman, settles their account and
introduces them to the club. There we must say farewell to Mr.
Davidson’s creations, but we cannot leave the Rhymers without
quoting, by the kindness of the author and publisher, the following
exquisite:—


BALLADE OF THE CHESHIRE CHEESE IN FLEET STREET.

    I know a home of antique ease
      Within the smoky city’s pale,
    A spot wherein the spirit sees
      Old London through a thinner veil.
      The modern world so stiff and stale,
    You leave behind you when you please,
      For long clay pipes and great old ale
    And beefsteaks in the “Cheshire Cheese.”

    Beneath this board Burke’s, Goldsmith’s knees
      Were often thrust—so runs the tale—
    ’Twas here the Doctor took his ease
      And wielded speech that like a flail
      Threshed out the golden truth. All hail,
    Great Souls! that met on nights like these
      Till morning made the candles pale,
    And revellers left the “Cheshire Cheese.”

    By kindly sense and old decrees
      Of England’s use they set their sail;
    _We_ press to never-furrowed seas,
      For vision-worlds we breast the gale,
      And still we seek and still we fail,
    For still the “glorious phantom” flees.
      Ah well! no phantom are the ale
    And beefsteaks of the “Cheshire Cheese.”

ENVOI.

    If doubts or debts thy soul assail,
      If Fashion’s forms its current freeze,
    Try a long pipe, a glass of ale,
      And supper at the “Cheshire Cheese.”


“THE 49 CLUB.”

This is a more recent club which met at the “Cheese” to partake, as
their “Chronicle” has it, of “a curious mysterie

    Yclept ye 49 pudding,
    Also Grylled Bones,
    Also Stewed Cheese,

together with such Olde Ales, Costlie Wines, and strong waters as may
suit ye taste, purse, or conscience of ye Members.”

The Chronicle of this club is very diverting, and begins with a motto
_not_ from Goethe,

  Ein guter Trunk
  Macht Alte junk

which is, after all, a very partial and temporary truth. For the
guidance of other social clubs I cannot refrain from quoting _in
extenso_ the article headed “Rules”:—

“The Rules of the Club being of the sort once heard are never
forgotten, there is no need to repeat them in this Chronicle.”

So much for the Forty-niners.


THE SOAKERS’ CLUB.

“We’ll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting days, and
moreo’er puddings and flapjacks; and thou shalt be welcome,” was
the Shakesperean motto of this frankly christened club. The pious
founder of the club, in a finely printed booklet, declared that “it
was deemed a requisite that your club should flourish under some
rollicking epithet such as had not previously been ‘empounded’ by
any other fraternity. The title should be terse; it should also be
outrageous. It should smack of the _caveau_, and have the scent of
the beeswing. Accordingly, many have been the creations that have in
turn possessed the mind of your promoters. Fuddling clubs, gorging
clubs, out Heroding Herod clubs—these comprised a whole hand of
clubs, in which was not a single trump. Then did your promoters
bethink themselves of that unctuous cognomen, ‘The Soakers.’ The
title is a nudity.... The name of ‘The Soakers’ Club’ is selected
only as conveying a sharp antithetical travestie upon our sober
habits as moderate men.” This last statement is consolatory, for
it would have been unpleasant if the club had come to the “Cheese”
merely to make manifest their loyalty to their name. They were good
fellows, and, though not quite antithetical to their designation
did not allow it to run riot with their moderate tendencies. They
dined at the “Cheese” regularly for years, but their numbers did not
increase, owing probably to the frank brutality of their title, and
the natural result was that they gradually dwindled away.


THE ST. DUNSTAN’S CLUB.

No wife, however shrewd, could object to her marital slave being a
member of the St. Dunstan’s, while even the most angelic of ladies
would scarcely like to see her lord flourishing as a leader among
“The Soakers.” Therefore has the St. Dunstan’s flourished like a
green bay tree for over a century. Its proud boast is that it has
contributed more Common Councilmen and Aldermen (and consequently
Lord Mayors) to the Corporation of the City of London than any other
club in the Metropolis.

The St. Dunstan’s is pre-eminently a social club, neither party
nor religion entering into its management. As may be expected, its
members (now limited to twenty-eight) are leading men in their
respective walks of life. The St Dunstan’s Club is called after the
courageous English saint who, according to tradition, once pulled
Satan by the nose with a pair of pincers. This episode in the life of
the holy friar is represented on the insignia of the club. The club
legend is that St. Dunstan shook the devil all round the boundaries
of the parish, and then dropped him in the Temple, hence the origin
of the name of the “Devil’s Own” applied to the legal profession,
hence also the name of the “Devil” tavern, nearly opposite St.
Dunstan’s Church, where the Apollo Club was presided over by Ben
Jonson. Fleet Streeters can no longer “go to the Devil,” in the
sense of going to any particular tavern, but anyone of respectability
may be introduced to Child’s Bank, No. 1 Fleet Street, which stands
on the Devil’s site. The bankers preserve in their parlour Jonson’s
Latin rules set down for the guidance of the club.

It appears by the Minute Book that the St. Dunstan’s Club was first
established at Anderton’s Coffee House on March 10, 1790, by the Rev.
Joseph Williamson, the then Vicar of St. Dunstan’s, Mr. Nicholls,
of St. Bride’s, Deputy of the South Side of the Ward of Farringdon
Without, and some fifteen others, inhabitants of Fleet Street and its
immediate vicinity. The club was limited to thirty members, whereof
twenty-six were to be inhabitants of the parish, and four gentlemen
resident in the ward. A chairman, treasurer, and secretary, were
annually elected at the first meeting of the club in the month of
October, and the toasts were fixed by resolution to be as follows:—

1st.—The King.

2nd.—The Queen, the Prince of Wales, and the rest of the Royal Family.

3rd.—Unanimity to this Parish.

4th.—Prosperity to the Ward.

5th.—The Absent Members.

At the first regular meeting of the club Mr. Brewer, of St.
Sepulchre’s, who was the Deputy for the North Side of the Ward, was
duly elected a member, and at a meeting held on October 17, 1792,
the celebrated John Wilkes, Alderman of the Ward, was unanimously
elected an honorary member. The subscription to the club was one
guinea per annum, and the principal source of income appears to have
been derived from wagers for bottles of wine amongst the members, the
annual elections for Common Councilmen in the Ward always producing
a good number of bets as to the position of the various members of
the club at the declaration of the poll. Wagers were laid about every
conceivable thing under the sun, as a few of the following examples
will show:—

January 25, 1792.—“Mr. Whipham laid Mr. P. North a gallon of claret
that 14 days from this date the 3 per Cent. Consols would be 95 per
cent.” Mr. Whipham lost.

January 16, 1793.—“Mr. P. North lays Mr. Hounsom a bottle of wine
that he (Mr. P. North) will be in bed before 2 o’clock the next
morning (January 17), and Mr. Hounsom lays Mr. P. North that he has
lost the above wager.”

June 12, 1793.—“Mr. P. North lays that Mr. Hounsom will not forget to
pay Mr. Thorne the 2d. to-morrow in the course of the day which he
(Mr. Thorne) had lent and advanced for him to pay the waiter 2d. for
a Welsh rarebit which Mr. Hounsom had for his supper.”

January 19, 1793.—“Mr. Thorne reported that Mr. Hounsom had paid him
the 2d. at half-past 9 o’clock in the morning.”

June 12, 1793.—“Mr. Lambe and Mr. Dep. Nicholls ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Lambe
lays that Mr. Dep. Nicholls knows Miss W——. _Upon explanation Mr.
Dep. Nicholls lost._ Mr. Jones and Mr. J. North ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Jones
lays that neither Mr. Lambe nor Mr. Dep. Nicholls knows Miss W——. Mr.
Jones lost. Mr. Dep. Nicholls requested that the club would permit
him to pay a bottle for having termed Miss W—— Mr. Hounsom’s _friend_
instead of _neighbour_. Ordered that it be granted. Mr. Lambe and Mr.
J. North ‘a bottle.’ Mr. Lambe lays that he (Mr. Lambe) never ran
away from a good thing. After some discussion it was decided that Mr.
Lambe had lost the bet.”

In 1795 a great number of bets were made about the wearing of hair
powder, and the wagering was so keen that counsel’s opinion was
taken as to who had won the respective bets; the original opinion
and decision of the counsel (Mr. George Bond, of Serjeants’ Inn) is
attached to the Minute Book.

It was also the custom of the club to wager on the “_first letter_”
of the King’s or Queen’s Speech after the words “_My Lords and
Gentlemen_.” This naturally afforded great scope for speculation,
which, it appears by the minutes, the members were accustomed to take
full advantage of. When the funds of the club were low the following
among other expedients was adopted:—

February 22, 1792.—“Resolved that any member of this club elected to
any office of honour or emolument shall pay for the benefit of the
club one bottle of port wine.”

April 8, 1795.—“Mr. Hounsom and Mr. Whipham ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Hounsom
lays that the Prince of Wales will not have issue within the space
of 12 months. Mr. Fisher and Mr. Williams ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Fisher
lays that the Prince of Wales will have issue within the space of 12
months. Mr. Thorne and Mr. George ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Thorne lays that
the Princess of Wales will be delivered of a son or daughter within
12 calendar months.”

April 22, 1795.—“Rev. Mr. Williamson and Mr. Ustonson ‘1 bottle.’
Mr. Williamson lays that the Princess of Wales is not delivered of a
son or daughter within 12 calendar months. Mr. Butterworth and Mr.
Piggott ‘1 bottle.’ Mr. Butterworth lays that the Prince of Wales
will not have issue within 12 months.”


THE LEGITIMIST CLUB.

Before leaving the subject of “Cheese” clubs one more of the many
which have enjoyed on occasion the hospitality of the “Cheese” may
be mentioned. Most people in this land, and presumably everybody in
America, would consider this club somewhat belated. It has an idea
that King Edward is a usurper, and that the rightful sovereign of
these isles and of the empire is some foreign potentate whom even his
own states disown. The following paragraph from the _Daily Telegraph_
of March 25, 1895, will show that whatever we may think of the views
of its members, the excellence of their taste in gastronomy cannot be
called in question:—

“A few gentlemen are still left in this hasteful, bustling, and
forgetful age who have time to remember that James I. ascended the
throne of England on March 24, 1603. It is hardly necessary to add
that they are members of the Thames Valley Legitimist Club, who
spend their leisure in moaning over the extinguished glories of
their country since the expulsion of James II. Taking advantage of
the fact that yesterday was not only the anniversary of the date
just given, but was also Mothering Sunday, when the rigidity of
the Lenten fast is temporarily suspended, they dined together last
evening in the Old Cheshire Cheese, and after doing justice to the
famous Johnsonian puddings and other viands, amused themselves after
their wont by inspecting a piece of the scaffold on which some
unfortunate followers of the House of Stuart were executed. The
health of the Queen was drunk, and it was incidentally mentioned as a
fact not generally known that, with two exceptions, every sovereign
in Europe was descended from the saintly mother of the monarch whose
anniversary they were that day celebrating. The health of Charles
VII. of Spain, whoever he may be, was duly honoured.”

[Illustration: Dr Johnson’s house in Gough Square (_By permission of_ MESSRS. INGRAM BROTHERS,
_Proprietors of “The Sketch.”_)]


FOOTNOTES:

[4] “The supper was elegant. Johnson had directed that a magnificent
hot apple-pie should make part of it, and this he would have stuck
with bay leaves, because, forsooth, Mrs. Lennox had written verses,
and, further, he had prepared for her a crown of bays with which,
but not till he had invoked the Muses by some ceremonies of his own
invention, he encircled her brows.”

The first literary child whose birth was here celebrated was a dreary
novel called _The Female Quixote, or the Adventures of Arabella_.




CHAPTER VIII

DR. JOHNSON’S HOMES AND HAUNTS

    Whoe’er has travelled life’s dull round,
      Where’er his stages may have been,
    May sigh to think he still has found
      The warmest welcome at an inn.
                                  SHENSTONE.


It is a common belief that Fleet Street is dotted with houses which
were Dr. Johnson’s homes in later years, and with the taverns in
which he sat drinking tea and talking philosophy till the small hours
of the morning. It is not so. The Doctor’s house at No. 1 Inner
Temple Lane has given way to “Johnson’s Buildings.”

In Johnson’s Court (named after Thomas Johnson, citizen and merchant
taylor, and one of the Common Council from 1598 till his death in
1625) the Doctor lived from 1765 to 1776, and during his “journey” in
Scotland humorously described himself as “Johnson of that Ilk.” The
house (No. 7) has, however, gone the way of all bricks and mortar. In
1776 he removed to No. 8 Bolt Court, where he passed the rest of his
life. The house was demolished soon after his death. In fact there
is only one house—No. 17 Gough Square—on which we can look and say,
“Here dwelt Dr. Johnson.”

Gough Square itself has undergone inevitable alteration, but
fortunately for the devotee, at the western end the Doctor’s house,
No. 17, still stands intact. Here his wife died in 1752, and here
he completed his Dictionary in 1755. In his note book for 1831,
Carlyle mentions having paid a visit to the house and interviewed
the occupant, who was apparently under the impression that his
illustrious predecessor in the tenancy had been a schoolmaster. So
he had been, and one of his pupils, a pupil of whom any master might
have been proud, was David Garrick. But the tenant knew not that
schoolmastering had long been abandoned when the Doctor was compiling
his Dictionary in that by no means majestic abode. On the right-hand
side of the doorway the Society of Arts has placed a plaque with the
following inscription:—

[Illustration: DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON

_Author_

LIVED HERE

B. 1709. D. 1784.]




CHAPTER IX

THE “CHEESE” AND ITS FARE—A GREAT FALL IN PUDDING

Resurgam.

  _La découverte d’un mets nouveau fait plus pour le bonheur du genre
  humain que la découverte d’une étoile._—BRILLAT-SAVARIN.


If, as Brillat-Savarin says, the discovery of a new dish does more
for the happiness of mankind than the discovery of a star, how much
more deserving of human gratitude is the discoverer of the “Cheese”
pudding than a Herschel or an Adams?

The _Sportsman_ of March 30, 1887, has a long and eulogistic article
on the “Cheese,” but exigencies of space preclude its being quoted
in its entirety. The writer says: “Happily the most famous of London
ancient taverns is left to us in the Old Cheshire Cheese, which
is yet nightly haunted by the shade of Dr. Johnson, whose modern
prototypes still enjoy their steaks and punch, and discuss politics,
polemics, and plays, though they wear short hair and masher collars
instead of full-bottomed wigs and ruffles.

“The ‘Old C.C.’ is a retiring, respectable, very conservative, and
hoary-headed aristocrat of the bygone school. Changes are made with
a very rebellious spirit, and the introduction of a patent American
machine for squeezing lemons savoured so much of modern progress
that its appearance nearly raised a riot amongst the patrons of the
sawdust-strewed bar. The ‘Cheese’ has no glaring front, nor does
it invite custom by acres of plate glass, glittering gasaliers, or
gorgeous frescoes. A modest representation of a cheese in dingy glass
does duty for a sign, so far as the street of Fleet is concerned.
The house has its school of customers, who look upon it as a species
of club, without the expense of entrance fee. How old the original
edifice was I am not prepared to say, but I notice by an ancient
sideboard that it was rebuilt in 1667.

“Inside, the hostelry has a curiously quaint, old-world appearance,
and this has been jealously preserved to good purpose by successive
proprietors. Rebuilt, decorated in the prevailing style of
public-house architecture, the ‘Old C.C.’ would have nothing to
recommend it over scores—nay, hundreds—of its fellows.

“The dining-room is fitted with rows of wooden benches and wooden
tables without the slightest pretence of show. But the cloths are
white and clean, and the cutlery bright, while the china service is
of that ancient and undemonstrative blue design which delighted our
forefathers, and is known as the willow pattern.... On the walls hang
three prominent objects, a barometer, a print of Dr. Johnson, and an
old oil painting by Wageman, representing the interior of the room,
with a gentleman trying his steak with his knife; a waiter holding up
a port wine cork in the well-known attitude ‘two with you’; and a cat
rubbing her oleaginous hide in anxious expectation against the leg
of the settle. This picture, like one in the bar, is an heirloom, or
rather a fixture, which cannot be sold—‘for ever and ever, amen!’—but
must pass from landlord to landlord.

“Upstairs there are extensive ranges of kitchens where burnt
sacrifices are being perpetually offered up in the shape of mutton
and beef; a dining-room and a smoke-room, dark-panelled and cosy,
where a man may forget the world and be lost to it during a much
coveted mid-day rest. Of other rooms on other floors no man knoweth,
save that in rumours it is alleged there have been private parties
over marrow-bones and puddings, a theory which is well borne out by
echoes of peals of laughter, and the popping of champagne corks.
Whatever the place may be above, however, it has no comparison
with the glories that lie below the paving. The privileged few who
are allowed to go into the wondrous cellars—redolent of sawdust,
cobweb-coated, and covered with dust—wander amidst avenues of
wine-bins with wonder and astonishment at the space occupied
underground as compared with the upper regions. The entrance to the
cellars is in the dingy office in the street of Fleet, which is
devoted to the wholesale department, and here a record is kept of the
rich old ports and generous clarets sleeping below, with the merry
devils of laughter bottled up in quarts and magnums in overcoats of
pink and foil. No man could remember them, be his experience as a
cellar-man what it may.

“The ‘Old C.C.’ is a fine record of the passing seasons. When
genial spring has brought forward vegetation, the waiter’s cheerful
intimation that ‘Asparagus is on, sir,’ recalls the fact forcibly to
your notice. When, later, ‘’Am and peas’ can be secured, the vision
of early summer is perfect, and is not even disturbed by boiled beans
and bacon. In the hot, sultry days, cool salads are appropriate, and
when these disappear there is a closing in of daylight and a general
warning that the year is past its prime. Then does the ‘Cheese’ draw
its blinds and light its gas, stoke up its fires, and announce its
great puddings. Yet further ahead, when raw November days come upon
us, the savoury smell of Irish stew—that fine winter lining for
the hungry—pervades the place and so the season goes round. Of all
the changes brought about by the rolling year, however, none is so
popular as the advent of

  THE PUDDING,

though it means frost, and damp, and cold winds. _The_ pudding
(italics for ‘the,’ please,) has no rival in size or quality. Its
glories have been sung in every country. The pudding ranges from
fifty to sixty, seventy, and eighty pounds’ weight, and gossip has
it that in the dim past the rare dish was constructed to proportions
of a hundredweight. It is composed of a fine light crust in a huge
basin, and there are entombed therein beefsteaks, kidneys, oysters,
larks, mushrooms, and wondrous spices and gravies, the secret of
which is known only to the compounder. The boiling process takes about

  SIXTEEN TO TWENTY HOURS,

and the smell on a windy day has been known to reach as far as the
Stock Exchange. The process of carving the pudding on Wednesdays and
Saturdays is a solemn ceremony. The late proprietor, Mr. Beaufoy A.
Moore, could be with difficulty restrained from rising from his bed,
when stricken down with illness, to drive to the ‘Cheese’ and serve
out the pudding. No one, he believed, could do it with such judicious
care and judgment as he did.

“Once, and once only was that pudding dropped. Alas, the sad day!
In the room sat an expectant hungry army of fifty men. The waiter,
bearing in triumph the pudding, appeared smiling on the scene. His
foot slipped, he tripped, the pudding wavered, and then bowled along
the floor, breaking up and gathering sawdust as it went. There was a
breathless silence. The proprietor dropped the upraised carver, stood
speechless for a moment, and then went out and wept bitterly. The
occasion was too much for him. One after another the awed and hungry
crowd put their hats on and departed, with sorrowful faces and watering
mouths.”




CHAPTER X

MR. GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA AND OTHERS ON THE “CHEESE”

    For he’s a jolly good fellow.—_Old Song._


The late Mr. George Augustus Sala, in an article entitled “Brain
Street,” which is to be found in “Old and New London” (Cassell,
Petter & Galpin), thus describes Wine Office Court and the Cheshire
Cheese:—

“The vast establishments of Messrs. Pewter and Antimony,
type-founders (Alderman Antimony was Lord Mayor in the year ’46);
of Messrs. Quoin, Case, and Chappell, printers to the Board of
Blue Cloth; of Messrs. Cutedge and Treecalf, bookbinders; with the
smaller industries of Scawper and Tinttool, wood-engravers; and
Treacle, Gluepot, and Lampblack, printing-roller makers, are packed
together in the upper part of the court as closely as herrings in
a cask. The ‘Cheese’ is at the Brain Street end. It is a little
lop-sided, wedged-up house, that always reminds you, structurally, of
a high-shouldered man with his hands in his pockets. It is full of
holes and corners and cupboards and sharp turnings; and in ascending
the stairs to the tiny smoking-room you must tread cautiously, if
you would not wish to be tripped up by plates and dishes momentarily
deposited there by furious waiters. The waiters at the ‘Cheese’
are always furious. Old customers abound in the comfortable old
tavern, in whose sanded-floored eating-rooms a new face is a rarity;
and the guests and the waiter are the oldest of familiars. Yet the
waiter seldom fails to bite your nose off as a preliminary measure
when you proceed to pay him. How should it be otherwise when on that
waiter’s soul there lies heavy a perpetual sense of injury caused
by the savoury odour of steaks and ‘muts’ to follow; of cheese
bubbling in tiny tins—the original ‘speciality’ of the house; of
floury potatoes and fragrant green peas; of cool salads, and cooler
tankards of bitter beer; of extra-creaming stout and ‘goes’ of Cork
and ‘rack,’ by which is meant gin; and, in the winter-time, of Irish
stew and rump-steak pudding, glorious and grateful to every sense?
To be compelled to run to and fro with these succulent viands from
noon to late at night, without being able to spare time to consume
them in comfort—where do waiters dine, and when, and how?—to be
continually taking other people’s money only for the purpose of
handing it to other people—are not these grievances sufficient to
cross-grain the temper of the mildest-mannered waiter? Somebody
is always in a passion at the ‘Cheese’: either a customer because
there is not fat enough on his ‘point’ steak, or because there is
too much bone in his mutton-chop; or else the waiter is wroth with
the cook; or the landlord with the waiter, or the barmaid with all.
Yes, there is a barmaid at the ‘Cheese,’ mewed up in a box not much
bigger than a bird-cage, surrounded by groves of lemons, ‘ones’ of
cheese, punch-bowls, and cruets of mushroom-catsup. I should not care
to dispute with her, lest she should quoit me over the head with a
punch-ladle, having a William-the-Third guinea soldered in the bowl.”

“Old and New London,” ch. 10, part iii., p. 123, contains this
paragraph:—

“Mr. William Sawyer[5] has also written a very admirable sketch of
the ‘Cheese’ and its old-fashioned conservative ways, which we cannot
resist quoting:—

“‘We are a close, conservative, inflexible body—we, the regular
frequenters of the “Cheshire,”’ says Mr. Sawyer. ‘No new-fangled
notions, new usages, new customs, or new customers for us. We have
our history, our traditions, and our observations, all sacred and
inviolable. Look around! There is nothing new, gaudy, flippant, or
effeminately luxurious here. A small room, with heavily timbered
windows, a low-planked ceiling. A huge projecting fireplace, with a
great copper boiler always on the simmer, the sight of which might
have roused even old John Willett, of the “Maypole,” to admiration.
High, stiff-backed, inflexible “settees,” hard and grainy in texture,
box off the guests half a dozen each to a table. Sawdust covers the
floor, giving forth that peculiar faint odour which the French avoid
by the use of the vine sawdust with its pleasant aroma. A chief
ornament in which we indulge is a picture over the mantel-piece,
a full-length of a now departed waiter, whom, in the long past,
we caused to be painted, by subscription of the whole room, to
commemorate his virtues, and our esteem. We sit bolt upright round
our tables, waiting, but not impatient. A time-honoured solemnity
is about to be observed, and we, the old stagers, is it for us to
precipitate it? There are men in the room who have dined here every
day for a quarter of a century—aye, the whisper goes round that one
man did it on his wedding day! In all that time the more staid and
well-regulated among us have observed a steady regularity of feeding.
Five days in the week we have “Rotherham steak”—that mystery of
mysteries—or our “chop and chop to follow,” with the indispensable
wedge of Cheshire—unless it is preferred stewed or toasted—and
on Saturday decorous variety is afforded in a plate of the
world-renowned “Cheshire” pudding. It is of this latter luxury that
we are now assembled to partake, and that with all fitting ceremony
and observance.’”


FOOTNOTES:

[5] The late Mr. Sawyer was for many years the brilliant editor of
_Funny Folks_. His articles signed “Rupert,” in the _Budget_ have
often been reprinted.




CHAPTER XI.

THE PRESS AND THE “CHEESE”

    Crown high the goblets with a cheerful draught;
    Enjoy the present hour; adjourn the future thought.
                                  DRYDEN’S _Virgil_.


Among the earlier notices of the “Cheese” which have appeared in
newspapers is the following, taken from _Common Sense, or, the
Englishman’s Journal_,[6] of Saturday, April 23, 1737:—

“On Sunday, April 17, one Harper, who formerly lived with Mr.
Holyoake at the sign of the ‘Old Cheshire Cheese,’ in Wine Office
Court, Fleet Street, for eight years, found Means to conceal himself
in the House, and early on Monday Morning got into the Room where
the Daughter lay, and where Mr. Holyoake (as he well knew) kept his
Money; and accordingly he took away a small Box wherein was £200
and Notes to the Value of £600 more. The Child, hearing a Noise,
happily awaked, and cry’d out, ‘Mammy, Mammy, a Man has carried away
the Box;’ which alarm’d her Father and Mother, who lay near, and
immediately they got up; which oblig’d the Fellow to hide himself in
the Chimney, where he was discover’d, with the Box carefully ty’d up
in a Handkerchief, and being secur’d, was afterwards carried before
the Lord Mayor, who committed him to Newgate.”

In the _Morning Herald and Daily Advertiser_ of Monday, August 9,
1784, we read an account of an attempted murder at the “Cheese.”
It appears that a porter in the Temple named John Gromont induced
a woman who had cohabited with, and then deserted him, to accept a
drink at a public-house in Wine Office Court, “where, starting up in
a fit of frenzy, he cut the woman’s throat.”

“Before the transaction he had made several attempts to destroy
himself at Mr. Bosher’s, the Rainbow, opposite the end of Chancery
Lane, in Fleet Street, and other public-houses in the neighbourhood.”

Coming to a more recent period, we find the press notices of the
“Cheese” increase in frequency. _Punch_, for April 14, 1864,
describes a famous evening at the “Cheese.” Mr. John Cordy
Jeaffreson, no mean authority, in his “A Book about the Table,”
mentions the “Cheese” as one of the three houses in the immediate
neighbourhood of the Inns of Court worthy of comparison with those
near St. Paul’s, and so the references go on ever spreading till they
cross the Atlantic and even return from the Antipodes.

Considerations of space will only permit a few further quotations
from the vast mass of journalistic literature dealing with the
subject.

The _Kent Examiner and Ashford Chronicle_ of June 20, 1885,
referring to the “Cheese,” says:—“It is very generally believed that
Shakespeare was one of its numerous frequenters, but undoubtedly
one famous man was, namely—François Marie Arouet, otherwise
Voltaire—while often enough were present Bolingbroke, Pope, and
Congreve, and it is well known that Rare Ben Jonson was one of its
most jolly frequenters. Coming down to more modern times, among the
many customers of the house have been Douglas Jerrold, Mark Lemon,
Shirley Brooks, Tom Taylor, Tom Hood, and last, but not least,
Thackeray and Dickens.”

In “A Walk up Fleet Street,” which appeared in the _Sunday Times_,
the following passage occurs:—“The Cheshire Cheese is not imposing
in appearance, nor is it even to be seen from the street. Two
little courts lead to its somewhat dingy portals; portals much
frequented by the London correspondents of provincial journals and
gallery reporters. More or less throughout every day of the week
barristers and journalists—even members of Parliament are not always
missing—come to this house for their dinner, and sit contentedly
round the sides of two good old-fashioned rooms. But it is on
Saturday that the Cheshire Cheese is seen at its best. Then it is
that ‘rump-steak pudding’ makes its appearance; announced all the
week, anxiously expected, come at last!”

The _Reporter_, of October 28, 1874, says of the “Cheese”:—

“We have occasionally used this old-fashioned house for over a
quarter of a century, and can conscientiously assert that for its
chops and steaks, cold beef and salad, and marvellous rump-steak
pudding, and for the alacrity with which these edibles are supplied
the establishment is unmatchable in the metropolis. Besides, the malt
liquors are of the strongest and the best brew, and the whiskies are
mellow and old; whilst the ancient punch, which is served exactly as
compounded in the days of Dr. Johnson, is simply nectar worthy of
elevating even the gods.”

Under the heading “Some Gossip about Famous Taverns,” a writer in the
_Licensed Victuallers’ Gazette_ says:—

“What man who has ever been called into Fleet Street, either on
business or pleasure, does not know the sawdusted floor and old-time
appointments of the Cheshire Cheese? Who would dare to confess
ignorance of the Brobdingnagian chops, the world-famous point steaks,
the stewed cheese, which constitute its main attractions all the
year round? Who has not here devoted himself during the hot summer
months, in the cool dining-room which seems ever impervious to the
sun’s rays, to the manufacture of an elaborate salad to enjoy with
his cold beef? And who, again, has never yet been so fortunate as to
witness that appetising procession to be seen every Saturday during
the winter months, when Mr. Moore, the master of the house, in dress
coat clad, and armed with a mighty carver, precedes into the room
that mighty steak and oyster pudding, the secret of whose manufacture
has never been allowed to penetrate beyond the mazes of Wine Office
Court.”

And again the same writer observes:—“The secret of the success of the
Cheshire Cheese is that everything sold within its doors is good. For
this we prefer its sanded floors to marble halls, for this we listen
curiously to the weird cry of the waiter up the crooked staircase
of ‘Rudderhumbake,’ which, by old experience, we know heralds
the approach of a choice cut from the mighty rump of a succulent
shorthorn or an Aberdeen steer.”

The _Philadelphia Times_ of October, 1884, thus refers to the
“Cheese”:—

“A famous man who haunted the ‘Cheese’ was Voltaire, side by side
with Bolingbroke, Pope, and Congreve, and there is to-day an old play
in manuscript in Scotland, written in Rare Ben Jonson’s day, in which
these lines occur:—

    “Heaven bless ‘The Cheese’ and all its goodly fare—
     I wish to Jove I could go daily there.
     Then fill a bumper up, my good friend, please—
     May fortune ever bless the ‘Cheshire Cheese.’”

A reviewer in the _City Press_ (October 30, 1875) says:—“Ben Jonson
loved the ‘Cheese’; and at one time you had only to walk into a Fleet
Street coffee-house to become familiar with all the choice spirits of
the age. Dean Swift, Addison, and Steele affected the tavern; so did
Sheridan, and so did Lord Eldon, and so, indeed, did all men of mark
down to our own time.”

An article headed:—

    “YE RUMPE STEAKE PUDDINGE”

in the _Fort Worth (Texas) Daily Gazette_ opens as follows:—

“While I am on the subject of ‘food’ I must be permitted to mention
that I enjoyed the privilege of partaking of ‘ye rumpe steake
puddinge’ a few days since at no less celebrated board than ‘The
Cheese,’ Wine Office Court, Fleet Street. ‘The Cheese,’ or, to
give it its full title, ‘Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese,’ is now the most
historical tavern of all the old taverns in London. Nearly all the
other taverns have had to make way for the more modern restaurant or
public-house. Little is known, it seems, of the very early history
of the place. A _brochure_ entitled ‘Round London,’ published in
1725, describes the house as ‘Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese tavern, near
ye Flete Prison, an eating house for goodly fare.’ And now in 1883,
or very near the beginning of the year 1884, I can bear cheerful
witness to the fact that it still deserves to be classed with the
very few public places in London where one can secure ‘goodly fare.’
The rump-steak pudding, which is the special feature of the place,
is certainly toothsome, and is not apt to be speedily forgotten by
the epicure. It has been served promptly at one o’clock p.m. every
Saturday ‘since when the memory of man runneth not to the contrary,’
and the particular one that I assisted to dissect was enjoyed by
quite a hundred persons. Though nominally a ‘steak pudding,’ there
are very many other ingredients in the dish than rump steak. It is
said that for more than 200 years the old tavern has changed hands
but twice, and that it is now in the hands of the third family that
has helped to keep up its ancient reputation. It is also said that
the recipe by which the pudding is builded is a secret that belongs
to the place, and is as sacred an heirloom as the old oil painting
of Henry Todd, who, according to the inscription on the portrait,
commenced waiter at the ‘Old Cheshire Cheese’ February 17, 1812.
This picture was, according to the inscription again, ‘painted by
Wageman, July, 1827, subscribed for by the gentlemen frequenting the
coffee-room, and presented to Mr. Dolamore (the landlord) in trust,
to be handed down as a heirloom to all future landlords of the Old
Cheshire Cheese, Wine Office Court, Fleet Street.’”

“Henry Todd, ‘Old’ Harry as he was familiarly called by the visitors,
had made a considerable sum of money while in his situation,” writes
the compiler of the great work on which the British Museum so prides
itself, “Signs of Taverns,” “but I am informed that a spendthrift son
reduced his circumstances much. To a stranger he appears a morose,
cynical kind of man, apparently not by any means adapted for the
waitership of a tavern, although he is always attentive to the wants
of his customers. Perhaps he was a different being when younger, and
to those who were old customers of the house and who knew him well,
he used more freedom probably.

“The portrait, I am informed, is the first attempt in oil by
that exceedingly talented artist Wageman, and was painted at the
instigation of a visitor to the house, a Mr. Thomas Morell, a
well-known pen and quill dealer who resided in the Broadway, Ludgate
Hill (a brother of the Morell also pen and ink dealer in Fleet
Street), and who was well known to the public for his eccentricity by
the name of Peculiar Tom Morell, from the singularity of his puffs
and advertisements.”

“Old Harry” retired soon after the portrait-painting from age and
infirmity, but was alive at Christmas, 1838.


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Printed and sold by J. Purser in White Fryars, and G. Hawkins at
Milton’s Head, between the Two Temple Gates, Fleet St. MDCCXXXVII.




CHAPTER XII

WHAT THE WORLD SAYS OF THE “CHEESE”

    That all-softening, overpowering knell,
    The tocsin of the soul—the dinner-bell.—BYRON.


The “Diner Out,” in the _Evening Standard_ of January 10, 1867,
writes:—

“In each of the apartments on the ground floor is a full-length
portrait, in oil, of a departed waiter—subscribed for upon his
retirement by the gentlemen ‘using’ the house. The one which most
strikes my memory at the moment is the representation of a portly,
respectable—scrupulously respectable—middle-aged man, clad in a
costume worn early in the century—that is to say, the coat is of
blue, the buttons are gilt, the cravat is a cheerful roll surmounting
a frilled shirt, and the legs know no trousers but the breeches and
stockings of departed days, when well-made men ‘stood upon their
legs’ in something more than the merely literal sense of the term.
The background of the picture is a faithful representation of a
section of the room in which it is hung. The box before which the
waiter is standing, opening a bottle of port (I say port, because
a man would never open a bottle of sherry with the same grave, but
complacent, air of responsibility), is a speaking likeness, and so is
evidently the representation of the guest for whom the order is being
executed—a person even more respectable than the waiter, if possible,
with a very high coat collar, his hair all brushed up to the top of
his head, and a cute knowledge of wine depicted in every lineament
of his countenance. You may be sure that no inferior quality is being
opened for him. Indeed, the waiter is as incapable of deceiving as
the guest of being deceived. The wine is evidently of that degree
of excellence which impels people to talk about it while they drink
it—a wine which is its own aim and end—not a mere stimulating drink,
setting men on to be enthusiastic upon general subjects. The diner is
plainly the model diner of the Cheshire Cheese, as the waiter is the
model waiter.

“The Cheshire Cheese is famous for steak-pudding, agreeably tempered
by kidneys, larks, and oysters. This dish, which is often ordered
for private parties, and even for private houses, is frequently
made the occasion of social gatherings of an extensive character—so
much so, indeed, that Madame Roland might have extended her
celebrated apostrophe to Liberty by saying—‘O Steak Pudding, how
much conviviality is committed in thy name!’ Whatever you get at the
‘Cheshire’ is sure to be good and capitally cooked.”

From an article entitled “At the Cheshire Cheese,” which appeared
in the _Commercial Travellers’ Review_, the following is taken:—“At
one o’clock—the time at which the ‘Cheese’ is most frequented—we
accompanied our friends up Fleet Street, and then by devious ways and
turnings, more than enough to upset our geography, until we finally
arrived at that part of Wine Office Court where the ‘Cheshire’
stands. We were ushered into what seemed most like the after cabin
of a steamer, with comfortably arranged and well appointed miniature
tables on either side, attended by trim obliging waiters, and
everything else equally inviting, and fully justifying our friend’s
previous good report. ‘Roast Lamb,’ ‘Roast Beef,’ ‘Boiled Beef,’
‘Beefsteak Pie,’ and——‘Thanks—plates for four of the first with
the various &c., and four tankards of stout.’ ‘Yes, sir’—and away
vanishes our excellent friend, the waiter, to the unknown regions
where cook holds sway and reigns supreme, only to return in less time
than it takes to record the fact, with all that was calculated to
make us content and comfortable.... We enjoyed one of the pleasantest
afternoons it has been our good fortune to participate in for many
a day. Pleasant dinner—pleasant company over a well-brewed bowl
of palatably flavoured sipping punch, that engendered pleasant
reflections on past assemblies and present associations—in the heart
of dear old London—surely no alloy was possible in our midst, and
nothing more was needed save the presence of some other far away
friends to overflow the cup of pleasure at the ‘Cheshire Cheese.’”

In the _World_ of December 24, 1884, there is an article on the “The
Old Chop Houses,” in which the writer, drawing on the recollections
of thirty years, says: “There was only one other house that excelled
the old Cheshire Cheese for a steak, and that was the Blue Posts in
Cork Street.... But as regards mutton, chops, the Cheshire Cheese
was unrivalled in London, or anywhere short of Barnsley, where a
mutton chop is about a third part of a loin, not reckoning the chump
end, and where this doubled or trebled chop is so taperly trimmed
and freed from its superfluous fat, that when cooked, by a process
which I take to be rather roasting than grilling, and served with
the fillet under, like a sirloin of beef, it might, by virtue of its
shapely plumpness, be taken for a roast partridge or grouse.”

Under the head of “Public Refreshment,” in Knight’s “London,” vol.
iv., p. 314, appears this passage:—

“There is a dingy house in a court in Fleet Street where the chops
and steaks are unrivalled. Who that has tasted there that impossible
thing of private cookery, a _hot_ mutton chop—a second brought
when the first is despatched—has not pleasant recollections of the
never-ending call to the cook of ‘two muttons to follow’?”

In Charles Dickens’s “A Tale of Two Cities” (book ii., chap. 4),
after the trial at the Old Bailey, the text proceeds:

“‘I begin to think I _am_ faint.’

“‘Then why the devil don’t you dine? I dined, myself, while those
numskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to—this or
some other. Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at.’

“Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate Hill
to Fleet Street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern.[7] Here
they were shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon
recruiting his strength with a good plain dinner and good wine; while
Carton sat opposite to him at the same table, with his separate
bottle of port before him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon
him.”

“Jeems Pipes, of Pipesville,” in a letter dated from Regent Street,
London, June 26, 1879, to the San Francisco _Daily Evening Post_,
thus refers to the Cheshire Cheese:—

“The Old Cheshire Cheese is, perhaps, at the present writing, one of
the most popular of the old hostelries, and when you consider that
for over two hundred years it has been in existence, and has been
patronised by celebrities of every degree, rank, and station, and
even royalty—for Charles II. ate a chop here with Nell Gwynne—and the
genial landlord will actually show you the seats used by Dr. Samuel
Johnson and Oliver Goldsmith, even to the marks on the wainscotted
wall made by their greased wigs; the corner where the author of
‘Pendennis’ and ‘The Newcomes’ sat, or where Charles Dickens, Mark
Lemon, Shirley Brooks, Douglas Jerrold, John Leech, and a host of
others enjoyed their ’arf-and-’arf and toasted cheese. The tavern is
situated up a little narrow passage called

  ‘WINE OFFICE COURT.’

I don’t think it can be more than three feet wide. On the right hand
side of it is the entrance. Over the door is a glass lamp painted
red, with the words ‘Old Cheshire Cheese’ on it. But, oh! what chops,
what steaks, what cold lamb and salad, what beefsteak pudding you
do get here! It is indeed a revelation! And should you be permitted
to ascend to the upper part of the building you will find the walls
adorned with paintings, articles of vertu, and other evidences of
comfort and ease, where the proprietor dispenses his hospitality in
the most genial manner; and, when I inform you that Mr. Moore is
a vestryman and churchwarden of St. Bride’s, will shortly become
Councilman, and probably Alderman and Lord Mayor, you will see that
it is no common thing to be the landlord of the ‘Cheshire Cheese.’”

Mr. Moore did not live to attain the dignity of Lord Mayor which
“Jeems Pipes” presaged. He died in 1886, loved and respected in his
life, and deeply lamented at his death by the troops of friends who
knew him both in his private and business life.

The following are extracted from a London letter in the _New York
World_ of September 14, 1884, and are interesting:—

“London abounds in historic taverns, but of them all none are
more historic and interesting than the ‘Cheese.’ To eat a steak
here is not to masticate fried cork, while the tankards of bitter
ale, foaming and delicious, with which you wash down the steak
are worth a long journey to enjoy. The folk-lore of this famous
haunt is interesting, not alone to tavern-loving, but to general
posterity, although as to a complete and detailed account of its
very early history there is much of obscurity. While there are no
positive proofs, there are authentic legends that Shakespeare spent
many an idle hour at this place, because it was on his way to the
Blackfriars’ Theatre, in Playhouse Yard, Ludgate Hill, of which he
was so long a time absolute manager. In his time the play began at 1
p.m. and ended at 5 p.m., at which hour the wits of the town mustered
forces in Fleet Street haunts.

“In modern times, William Makepeace Thackeray, Charles Dickens, and
now to-day that prince of diners and _bons vivants_, George Augustus
Sala, have frequented the Cheshire Cheese and waxed eloquent over
its comforts and subtle charms. Both Dickens and Thackeray knew how
to appreciate a good inn, and, after singing the praises of the bill
of fare, pay deserved compliments to the waiters. Men who serve
the frequenters of the Cheshire grow gray in the service, and each
boasts his own particular customers. Of the younger waiters all are
most civil, and the young women at the bar are not only polite, but
lady-like in manners and appearance.

“It is surprising how soon one gets used to the innovation of the
feminine bar-tender, and it is not to be questioned that it is a good
custom, productive of greater refinement among the male frequenters,
and, where the young women conduct themselves modestly, in no wise
degrading to their minds or morals.

[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE OF BILL OF FARE.

_By Cruickshank_]

“It matters little what hour you select to visit ‘Ye Olde Cheshire
Cheese,’ you will have plenty to amuse and instruct you, and always
find the pretty barmaids in the bar room attentive and clever.
The cutting of the rump-steak and kidney pie is a spearing process
performed by the proprietor, and often as many as three, even four
waiters are needed to lift the huge smoking hot pie to the centre
table, while often from thirty to sixty hungry men wait at the
various tables for a triangle of this toothsome viand. Take my word
for it, you will have a great desire for a second help, and even
though, like myself, you are a petticoat wearer, no one will annoy
you or even look surprised at your devoting an evening among the odd
masculine characters nightly frequenting ‘Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese.’”

In an article written by Mr. W. Outram Tristram, and illustrated
by Mr. Herbert Railton, the _English Illustrated Magazine_ of
December, 1889, gives, under the title of “A Storied Tavern,” a most
interesting account of this old house.

“Here,” says the writer, “is no home for kickshaws and cigarettes.
From this kitchen comes no sample of fashionable culinary art, that
‘art with poisonous honey stolen from France.’ Nothing of that kind
obtains at the Cheshire Cheese. Here the narrowed kingdom lies
of point steaks turned to a second and served hissing on plates
supernaturally hot, of chops gargantuan in size and inimitable in
tenderness and flavour, of cheese bubbling sympathetically in tiny
tins, of floury potatoes properly cooked, of tankards of bitter beer,
of extra creaming stout, of a rump-steak and oyster pudding served
on Saturdays only,[8] and so much the specialty of the house, that I
must deal with it hereafter. All smacks here of that England of solid
comfort and solid plenty.

“There is a collection of useful

    IMPLEMENTS OF INEBRIETY

in the bar of the Cheshire Cheese, which brings the place’s past more
vividly, perhaps, before one than any view of its sanded floors,
low ceilings, or quaint staircase, disappearing suddenly from the
entrance passage in formal but inviting bend.

“Voltaire was certainly here; Bolingbroke, in this place cracked many
a bottle of Burgundy; and Congreve’s wit flashed wine-inspired, while
Pope, sickly and intolerant of tobacco-smoke, suffered under these
low roofs I doubt not many a headache. But it is of its distinguished
visitors of later days that the Cheshire Cheese as it now stands
reminds one most fully. Johnson, Garrick, Goldsmith, and Chatterton
were undoubted frequenters. Many a time the great Samuel, turning
heavily in his accustomed seat, and beset by some pert sailing
pinnace, brought, like a galleon manœuvring, his ponderous artillery
to bear. Goldsmith lived at No. 6 Wine Office Court, where he wrote
or partly wrote the ‘Vicar of Wakefield,’ his flagging inspiration
possibly gaining assistance from the tavern’s famed Madeira.

“His (Dr. Johnson’s) frequent, nay, nightly visits here are matters
of history, and have been vouched for on

  AUTHORITY BEYOND DISPUTE.

The time is not so far distant when old frequenters to the house
were to be found who had drunk and eaten with men whom Johnson had
conversationally annihilated, and who recalled the circumstance with
an extreme clearness of recollection. A recollection this which
joined the record of two generations of the tavern’s great visitors.
And the second generation offered names not unworthy to compare with
the first, such notabilities as these figuring in the list: Dickens,
Thackeray, Douglas Jerrold, Mark Lemon, Shirley Brooks, Tom Taylor,
John Forster, Sir Alexander Cockburn, Professor Aytoun, Tom Hood,
Andrew Halliday, and Charles Mathews.”

Miss Sarah Morton, a special correspondent of the _Illustrated
Buffalo Express_ (N.Y.), gives in her paper, February 15, 1891, an
amusing report of her visit to the “Cheese.” “It was,” she says,
“with slow and lingering steps that I emerged from a visit to the
ghastly yet fascinating Tower of London, by the way of old St. Paul’s
Churchyard into Fleet Street, towards the ‘Cheshire Cheese.’ ’Twas
the night of the beefsteak pudding, a delicacy served only twice a
week, and in precisely the same way that it has been served in this
very place for 200 years.

       *       *       *       *       *

“One feels just like sidling into an old-fashioned church pew, for
the three tables on the left, each accommodating six persons, are
provided with high-backed benches black with age.

“‘Will you wait for the pudding?’ asks the Imposing Personage.

“‘What time will it come on?’ I diffidently query.

“‘Six o’clock to the minute,’ was the answer.

“‘I will wait,’ I replied, and again I was left alone to continue my
observations.

“Over on the broad window seat is something under glass in a gilt
frame. It is a most glowing description of the glories of ‘Ye Olde
Cheshire Cheese,’ written by Jeems Pipes of Pipesville.

“Every seat is occupied.

“’Tis just six.

“The door swings slowly open. A huge, round white ball is borne
aloft, high above the head of The Personage, who enters with slow
and stately tread, followed in single file by six serious-faced
attendants. The salver is tenderly lowered, and rests upon the
table. Every eye is fixed upon it. The room is pervaded with perfect
hush.

“The Personage solemnly receives a big spoon and knife from his first
gentleman in waiting. The fateful moment has arrived. The pastry is
broken. The gravy gently oozes over it.

“The Personage gravely approaches me and apologises for not serving
me first, but ‘really the middle portion will be safer for you,’ he
explained.

“The plates of the others were heaped upon. My time has come. There
is my big dinner plate piled high with—what on earth! Birds! yes,
tiny bits of birds, skylarks, kidneys, strips of beef, just smothered
in pastry like sea-foam, and dark brown gravy, steaming with
fragrance, as seasoning.

“‘Half-and-half’—British bitter and stout in old-time pewter mugs was
brought; out of deference to my sex, I suppose, a glass tumbler was
placed before me, but I scorned to use it. Didn’t Thackeray say it
was worth a year’s absence in far-away countries to realise the joy
that filled one’s soul upon returning to old England and quaffing her
bitter from a pewter mug?

“Then came stewed cheese, on the thin shaving of crisp, golden toast
in hot silver saucers—so hot that the cheese was of the substance
of thick cream, the flavour of purple pansies and red raspberries
commingled.

“There were only 400 skylarks put into the pudding made for the
Prince of Wales at the banquet of the Forth Bridge opening in
Edinburgh. How many thousands of the ‘blithe spirits’ have been put
into the Cheshire Cheese pudding for 200 years?

“Shades of Shelley and Keats!”

In _Society_ a series of articles was devoted to the description
of famous restaurants and of the fare to be enjoyed within their
walls. The writer, long an intimate of the “Cheese,” devotes not the
least piquant of his descriptions to that immortal house. He writes:
“Christopher North chopped here, and has recorded his high opinion
of its kitchen and its cellar. I fancy, however, that it was about
the early _Punch_ period that its real connection with journalism
was ratified and the union consummated. Shirley Brooks has written
pleasantly about it, Albert Smith has chaffed it, Edmund Yates has
embalmed it in his ‘Reminiscences,’ and I have always had an idea
that the Fleet Street chop-house in which poor Sydney Carton is found
sitting in a semi-drunken condition is the Cheshire Cheese. Dickens,
at all events, knew this place well, nor was it likely to escape a
use of this sort. Mr. George Augustus Sala was a constant customer.”

The _Freemason’s Chronicle_ of June 5, 1886, in reviewing an earlier
edition of this little book, says:—“The praises of Ye Olde Cheshire
Cheese, one of the most antiquated, and yet the most favourite,
resorts in the city of London, have been sung by historians and
poets through the whole of the last century, and quaint stories have
been handed down to us of scenes and incidents that have from time
to time been enacted within the age-begrimed walls of this historic
‘chop-house.’ In these days of progress, when the links connecting
us with the bygone history of Old London are being snapped one by
one, and once familiar landmarks are being improved off the face
of the City by modern innovations, it is refreshing to be able to
sit down and con over the sayings and doings of eminent men who
have left ‘footprints on the sands of Time,’ and whose names are
immortalised in literature and song. This little volume brings us
_tête-à-tête_ with such sturdy intellects as those of Dr. Johnson,
Boswell, Reynolds, Goldsmith, Burke, and a host of other ‘men of the
time,’ who in their periods of leisure sought ease and refreshment at
the ‘Cheese,’ and set the tables often in a roar with their pungent
criticisms and flights of mirth and satire.

“You can have pointed out to you the seats used by Dr. Samuel
Johnson, Oliver Goldsmith, even to the marks on the wainscoted
walls made by their greased wigs; the corner where the author of
‘Pendennis’ and the ‘Newcomes’ sat; or where Charles Dickens, Mark
Lemon, Shirley Brooks, Douglas Jerrold, John Leech, and a host
of others enjoyed their ’arf-and-’arf and toasted cheese. The
‘Cheese’ has still its _habitués_ and on Saturday there is the
famous rump-steak pudding, which draws a large attendance, for it is
considered that you may search the wide world round without matching
that succulent delicacy. Although we miss the genial form and face
of the late Moore, whose prerogative it was to preside over this
_chef-d’œuvre_ of the culinary art, yet his place is filled by a
worthy scion of the race, and the company, if not so garrulous or
so boisterous as of yore, is still permeated by a sense of deep and
affectionate loyalty to the ‘old shop.’”

The _Globe_ of September 23, 1887, says: “London itself bristles with
associations of the great dead. The toil and moil of Fleet Street
has tired you. Then turn up Wine Office Court and enter the Cheshire
Cheese, where you may sit in the same seat, perchance drink out of
the same glass, and if, like poor Oliver, you still ask for more, it
is possible to rest your head on the identical spot of grease that
Johnson’s wig provoked on the bare wall.”


FOOTNOTES:

[7] Indubitably the Cheshire Cheese.

[8] An error on the part of the writer. It is served on Mondays and
Wednesdays as well.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE “CHESHIRE CHEESE” IN LITERATURE


“THE FIELD OF ART” (“Scribner”), Feb. 1897:

“There is no date recorded of the building of the ‘Cheese,’ but
for over two hundred years it has been in existence, and has been
patronised by celebrities of every degree. Charles II. ate a chop
there with Nell Gwynne. A brass tablet in one corner informs you that
this was the favourite seat of Dr. Samuel Johnson, and the panelling
immediately below is quite polished by the heads of generations of
the faithful who have held it an honour to occupy the seat....

“Along Fleet Street nineteenth century humanity rushes in throngs,
feverishly intent on the main chance. But now and again units from
the mass fall out and disappear into a little doorway, so unobtrusive
in its character as to be easily passed by strangers in search of
it. A small passageway, a bit of court, and one enters the Old
Cheshire Cheese, treading in the footsteps of generations of wits
and philosophers. A wit the visitor may not be, but he is certain to
be the other in one way or another, and his purpose in coming here
can have little in common with the hurly-burly he has but just left
out there in Fleet Street. The tide of affairs has left him stranded
on an oasis of peculiar charm—a low-ceilinged room, brown as an old
meerschaum, heavily raftered, and carrying to the sensitive nostril
the scent of ages, the indescribable aroma inseparable from these
haunts of geniality: the merry glow of the fire in the old grate,
flirting tiny flames upwards that caress the steaming, singing kettle
hanging just above. The old copper scuttle glints with the fitful
gleams upon its burnished pudgy sides; the floor spread abundantly
with sawdust softens the sounds of footfalls. The white tablecloths
make the note of tidiness relieving the prevailing low tone of the
room.... The silk hats and trousers of modern London almost seem out
of harmony with the cosy quaintness of their environment; but smalls
and buckles, and cocked hats pass away, and architecture survives the
fashions and persons of its creators.

“The waiter before one looks very different from the picture on the
wall of his one-time predecessor, but, what is important, the spirit
remains the same. In an atmosphere of good fellowship the frequenters
of to-day converse over their chop and pint, or perhaps before the
cheery fire nurse their knees in reflective mood, drawn together by
the same instincts that animated this delightful company of old.

“But who among these, if appealed to, could define the æsthetic
charm of the place? Is it the rich colouring of yellow, and old
gold, and silver, and brown, the traditions mellow as old wine that
sweeten the atmosphere, the satisfaction of the senses, the pure
contentment of soul, the pause by the way for the furbishing of one’s
mental apparel? It is all these and more that make the Old Cheshire
Cheese a delight, and, when one has gone, leaves of its high-backed
benches and polished tables, its general aspect of warm and cheery
hospitality, a glowing memory.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“CHAMBERS’S JOURNAL,” Saturday, June 2, 1883, after speaking of
an imaginary journey from Temple Bar eastward, thus describes the
“Cheese”:

“There is another old City tavern where Dr. Johnson and Goldsmith
often sat together over a snug dinner, a tavern in Wine Office
Court called the Old Cheshire Cheese. Passing along Fleet Street
and glancing up this court, those magic words seem to take up all
the space in the distance as completely as though they were being
glanced at through a telescope, and if you follow the instincts of
your nature you will dive down the telescope towards the attractive
lamp above the door, and enter the tavern. The customary pint of
stout in an old pewter will be placed before you, if your taste
lies that way; and when you have finished your chop, or steak, or
pudding as the case may be, there will follow that speciality for
which the Cheshire Cheese is principally noted, a dish of bubbling
and blistering cheese, which comes up scorching in an apparatus
resembling a tin of Everton toffee in size and shape.

“It was the same when frequented by Johnson and Goldsmith, and their
favourite seats in the north-east corner of the window are still
pointed out. Nothing is changed—except the waiters, in course of
nature—in this conservative and cosy tavern. If Goldsmith did not
actually write parts of the ‘Vicar of Wakefield’ in that corner, he
must have thought out more chapters than one while seated there. He
lived in Wine Office Court, and here it is supposed the novel begun
at Canonbury Tower was finished.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“PICTURESQUE LONDON” (Percy Fitzgerald):

“Fleet Street, interesting in so many ways, is remarkable for the
curious little courts and passages into which you make entry under
small archways. These are Johnson’s Court, Bolt Court, Racquet Court,
and the like. But in Fleet Street there is one that is specially
interesting. We can fancy the Doctor tramping up to his favourite
tavern, the Cheshire Cheese.

“Passing into the dark alley known as Wine Office Court, we come to
a narrow flagged passage, the house or wall on the other side quite
close and excluding the light. The ‘Cheese’ looks indeed a sort of
dark den, an inferior public-house, its grimed windows like those of
a shop, which we can look at from the passage. On entering, there
is the little bar facing us, and always the essence of snugness and
cosiness; to the right a small room, to the left a bigger one. This
is the favourite tavern, with its dingy walls and sawdusted floor,
a few benches put against the wall, and two or three plain tables
of the rudest kind. The grill is heard hissing in some back region
where the chop or small steak is being prepared; and it may be said
_en passant_ that the flavour and treatment of the chop and steak
are quite different from those ‘done’ on the more pretentious grills
which have lately sprung up. On the wall is the testimonial portrait
of a rather bloated waiter—Todd, I think, by name—quite suggestive
of the late Mr. Liston. He is holding up his corkscrew of office to
an expectant guest, either in a warning or exultant way, as if he had
extracted the cork in a masterly style. Underneath is an inscription
that it was painted in 1812, to be hung up as an heirloom and handed
down, having been executed under the reign of Dolamore, who then
owned the place. Strange to say, the waiter of the Cheshire Cheese
has been sung, like his brother at the Cock, but not by such a bard.
There is a certain irreverence, but the parody is a good one:

    “Waiter at the Cheshire Cheese,
     Uncertain, gruff, and hard to please,
     When ‘tuppence’ smooths thy angry brow,
     A ministering angel thou!

“It has its _habitués_, and on Saturday there is a famous rump-steak
pudding which draws a larger attendance, for it is considered that
you may search the wide world round without matching that succulent
delicacy. These great savoury meat puddings do not kindle the ardour
of many persons, being rather strong for the stomachs of babes.

“Well, then, hither it was that Dr. Johnson used to repair. True,
neither Boswell nor Hawkins, nor after them Mr. Croker, takes note
of the circumstances, but there were many things that escaped Mr.
Croker, diligent as he was. There is, however, excellent evidence
of the fact. A worthy solicitor named Jay—who is garrulous, but not
unentertaining in a book of anecdotes which he has written—frequented
the Cheshire Cheese for fifty years during which long tavern life
he says, ‘I have been interested in seeing young men when I first
went there who afterwards married; then in seeing their sons dining
there, and often their grandsons, and much gratified by observing
that most of them succeeded well in life. This applies particularly
to the barristers with whom I have so often dined when students, when
barristers, and some who were afterwards judges.’”

Mr. Fitzgerald then goes on to quote from Jay the extract given in an
earlier chapter, and concludes by saying, “Be that as it may, it is
an interesting locality and a pleasing sign—the Old Cheshire Cheese,
Wine Office Court, Fleet Street, which will afford the present
generation, it is hoped, for some time to come an opportunity of
witnessing the kind of tavern in which our forefathers delighted to
assemble for refreshment.”

       *       *       *       *       *

G. A. S. (“Twice Round the Clock: Six P.M.”) (talking of the ancient
Roman repasts): “Better I take it, a mutton chop at the Cheshire
Cheese than those nasty ancient Roman repasts.”

       *       *       *       *       *

THE “GENTLEMAN’S MAGAZINE,” April, 1895 (“A Six Days’ Tour in London
with a Pretty Cousin”):—

“We must take a glance at a tavern of the good old pattern close
by, which has a regular pedigree and has had books written about
it—the Cheshire Cheese to wit. We go up Wine Office Court and there
it stands with its blinking windows and somewhat shaky walls.... Not
so, Mr. Sylvanus Urban, the windows of the good old house may blink,
but there is nothing shaky about the walls, they at all events are
founded on a rock solid as the credit of the house. No wonder too,
for it carries its two hundred years or so bravely enough, and like
its extinct neighbour, the Cock, witnessed the Plague and Fire. It
is needless to say that the older Cheshire Cheese perished in the
Fire of London, which stopped about a hundred yards west of Wine
Office Court, just on the City side of St. Dunstan’s Church. Here the
floor is sanded—or rather sawdusted; here are boxes and rude tables;
the chop is done on a gridiron before you, and there is a beefsteak
pudding which delights epicures.”

       *       *       *       *       *

WALTER THORNBURY (“Old and New London”):

“Goldsmith appears to have resided at No. 6 Wine Office Court from
1760 to 1762. They still point out Johnson and Goldsmith’s favourite
seats in the north-east corner of the window of that cosy though
utterly unpretentious tavern, the Cheshire Cheese in this court.

“It was while living in Wine Office Court that Goldsmith is
supposed to have partly written that delightful novel, the ‘Vicar
of Wakefield,’ which he had begun at Canonbury Tower. We like to
think that seated in the ‘Cheese’ he perhaps espied and listened
to the worthy but credulous vicar and his gosling son attending to
the profound theories of the learned and philosophic but shifty
Mr. Jenkinson. We think now, by the windows, with a cross light
upon his coarse Irish features and his round prominent brow, we
see the watchful poet sit eyeing his prey, secretly enjoying the
grandiloquence of the swindler and the admiration of the honest
country parson.”

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. LEWIS HOUGH, in “Once a Week,” Oct. 26, 1867:

“The historical haunts of Fleet Street have a peculiar charm for
those who are open to the influences of association. The bench
may be hard, but Dr. Johnson has sat upon it; the oak panelling
is not luxurious to lean back against, but the periwigs of Steele
and Addison have pressed it; the little room may be dingy, but
the peach-coloured garments of Goldsmith once lent it a temporary
brilliancy.

“The Cock, immortalised by Tennyson, will live for ever in poetry,
but the architects, alas! have decided that it shall vanish from the
world of prose. But there is a favourite haunt of mine higher up in
Fleet Street. There you can feast upon marrow bones. On Saturdays
the _pièce de résistance_ is a wonderful pudding compounded of
steaks, oysters, kidneys, and other unknown delicacies; there is a
smoking-room upstairs, where punch is served in an old-fashioned
bowl, with glasses of the pattern in use in the last century.


THE CHEESE IN THE TIME OF JOHNSON

“‘As soon as I enter the door of a tavern’—and many were the taverns
whose doors the great Samuel entered—exclaimed Dr. Johnson from that
tavern chair which he regarded as the throne of human felicity, ‘I
experience an oblivion of care and a freedom from solitude; when I
am seated I find the master courteous’ (courtesy is thus hereditary
in the masters of the Cheshire Cheese) ‘and the servants obsequious
to my call, anxious to know and ready to supply my wants; wine then
exhilarates my spirits and prompts me to free conversation and an
interchange of discourse with those whom I most love: I dogmatise and
am contradicted, and in this conflict of opinion and sentiments I
delight.’

“One can picture to oneself Johnson when he had entered and taken his
favourite seat at the Cheshire Cheese, the fire blazing then as it
blazes to-day, after a lapse of more than a century, in the mighty
grate, and casting its flashes, as it casts them to-day, over the
same oak-wainscotted walls, infusing a ruddier glow into the red
curtains drawn across the windows, and dropping a deeper-dyed ruby
into the drink that was meant for men.

“All the other tavern haunts which Johnson and his disciples
frequented have passed away or been improved out of all semblance to
the Johnson era; but the Cheese remains, within and without, the same
as it did when Goldsmith reeled up the steps to his lodgings opposite
the main entrance in Wine Office Court, or Johnson rolled his huge
bulk past it to the house in Gough Square, where his wife died in
1752 and the Dictionary was completed in 1755.”

MR. PHILIP NORMAN, in the “Illustrated London News” for December,
1890, remarks, in his “Inns and Taverns of Old London”:

“The faithful journey to the Cheshire Cheese firm in the belief that
when Goldsmith lived hard by in Wine Office Court the two friends
must have spent many an hour together in those panelled rooms and
have sat on the seat assigned to them by tradition. Now that the Cock
has quitted his original home, though under his former proprietor”
(it must be remembered this was written in 1890, and does not hold
at present—he crows gallantly over the way) “the Cheshire Cheese is
unquestionably the most perfect specimen of an old-fashioned tavern
in London.”

JOHN CORDY JEAFFRESON (“A Book about the Table,” vol. ii. page 43):

“But ere we pass from beef to less majestic delicacies, let us render
homage to the steak pudding, than which no goodlier fare can be
found for a strong hungry man on a cold day. Rising from his pudding
at the Cheshire Cheese, such a feaster is at a loss to say whether
he should be most grateful for the tender steak, savoury oyster,
seductive kidney, fascinating lark, rich gravy, ardent pepper, or
delicate paste.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“SCRIBNER” (“In London with Dickens”), March, 1881:

“These noisy and nasty eating-houses” (in and about Chancery Lane)
“are in striking contrast with the staid old-fashioned taverns in the
same neighbourhood, the Cheshire Cheese, etc.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“The tavern,” says SIR WALTER BESANT (in “Fifty Years Ago”), “We can
hardly understand how large a place it filled in the lives of our
forefathers, who did not live scattered about in suburban villas,
but over their shops and offices. When business was over, all, of
every class, repaired to the tavern. Dr. Johnson spent the evenings
of his last years wholly at the tavern; the lawyer, the draper, the
grocer, even the clergyman, all spent their evenings at the tavern,
going home in time for supper with their families. The Cheshire
Cheese is a survival; the Cock, until recently, was another. And
when one contrasts the cold and silent coffee-room of the new great
club, where the men glare at each other, with the bright and cheerful
tavern where every man talked with his neighbour, and the song went
round, and the great kettle bubbled upon the hearth, one feels that
civilisation has its losses.”

       *       *       *       *       *

MARK LEMON (“Punch”):


“LINES WRITTEN AT THE ‘CHEESE.’

“DEDICATED TO LOVELACE.

    “Champagne will not a dinner make,
     Nor caviare a meal.
     Men gluttonous and rich may take
     Those till they make them ill.
     If I’ve potatoes to my chop,
     And after chop have cheese,
     Angels in Pond & Spiers’s shops
     Know no such luxuries.”




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 24 Changed: Views of the Honse
             to: Views of the House

  pg 24 Changed: Mecca of Anglo-Saxondum
             to: Mecca of Anglo-Saxondom

  pg 50 Changed: anl the natural result
             to: and the natural result



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE CHEESE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cottage Cheese Recipe Book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cottage Cheese Recipe Book

Creator: Milk Industry Foundation

Release date: May 13, 2021 [eBook #65327]

Language: English

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COTTAGE CHEESE RECIPE BOOK ***




                      _Cottage Cheese Recipe Book_


                              _Appetizers_
                                _Salads_
                           _Salad Dressings_
                                _Breads_
                             _Main Dishes_
                               _Desserts_

                            _Borden Company_




                  _Nutritive Value of Cottage Cheese_


Cottage cheese is a concentrated form of milk. One pound of cottage
cheese contains most of the protein, calcium, phosphorous, iron, and
vitamins found in three quarts of milk.

Three ounces of cottage cheese furnishes about 50% of an adult’s daily
requirement for calcium.

Cottage cheese is a complete protein (builds, repairs, and maintains
body tissue); therefore, it is particularly desirable for growing
children and is an ideal food for adults.

Cottage cheese is easily digested and readily assimilated. It is an
important food for the person desiring to lose weight because of its
high nutritive value and low caloric content. One ounce of creamed
cottage cheese supplies about 30 calories.

In addition to its concentrated food value, cottage cheese is also a
very versatile food. It can be served in a variety of tempting ways
because it combines nicely with almost any type of food.

    [Illustration: WHAT BECOMES OF THE MILK DISTRIBUTOR’S DOLLAR]

 SALARIES & WAGES                                                    .2080
    Cost of Raw Milk delivered at the plant                 .5146[1]
    Other Material Costs—cream, skim milk, chocolate, etc.  .1039
 MATERIAL COSTS                                                      .6185
 INSURANCE, DEPRECIATION & ALL OTHER EXPENSE                         .0304
 CONTAINERS, BOTTLES, CANS, ETC.                                     .0405
 PLANT DELIVERY & OFFICE SUPPLIES                                    .0525
 TAXES & LICENSES                                                    .0217
 ADVERTISING                                                         .0078
 NET OPER. PROFIT                                                    .0206[2]

Chart shows operating results of 313 distributing companies in 42
states, the District of Columbia and Hawaii with combined sales of
$1,014,915,023 in 1949. Averages are from figures submitted to the
Indiana University School of Business for the Milk Industry Foundation.


[1](includes .0138 paid by 73 firms for transaction which was not
    deducted from the amount paid the producer)

[2]This is about ⅖ of a cent a quart.




                          _Table of Contents_


                                                                    Page
  Nutritive value of Cottage Cheese                                    1
  Appetizers                                                           5
  Salads                                                               7
  Salad Dressings                                                     13
  Breads                                                              14
  Main Dishes                                                         16
  Desserts                                                            25




                              _Appetizers_


                         _Cottage Cheese Rolls_

  1 cup cottage cheese
  ½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  2 tablespoons chili sauce
  Salt and pepper
  12 slices dried beef

Mix cheese, sauces, and seasonings. Spread on beef, roll and fasten with
toothpicks.


                        _Cottage Canape Spread_

  2 cups sieved cottage cheese
  1 tablespoon bouillon paste
  few drops onion juice

Drain excess moisture from cottage cheese and force through fine sieve.
Combine with bouillon paste and onion juice and beat vigorously to
blend. Chill until ready to use. Use as a spread on crisp wafers.


                        _Cheese and Jelly Tray_

  1 pound cream-style cottage cheese
  Toasted crackers

Choice of one or more of the following:

  Raspberry jam
  Strawberry preserves
  Currant jelly
  Orange marmalade

Drain off excess moisture from cheese and put through a fine sieve or
whip until smooth. Pile in a serving dish. In a similar dish or dishes
unmold the jelly or jam, and place on one side of a round or square
tray. Arrange rows of over-lapping toasted crackers on the other side of
tray and serve while crackers are still warm.


                        _Fluffy Cottage Cheese_

  1 cup sieved cottage cheese
  ¼ cup sour cream
  Salt and pepper

Mix cheese and sour cream lightly together, just enough to blend. Season
to taste. (More elaborate seasonings for cottage cheese are caraway and
poppy seeds, garlic and onion salts, and herbs.) Serve as a dip for
potato chips.


                             _Avocado Dunk_

  1 cup sieved cottage cheese
  Salt and pepper
  Pickle relish
  Horseradish
  1 Avocado, mashed
  Grated onion
  Cream or mayonnaise

Blend cottage cheese well with mashed avocado and seasoning. Thin with
cream or mayonnaise. Serve as a dip for potato chips.


                        _Cottage Cheese Spreads_

Combine cottage cheese, anchovies, paprika, and a dash of cayenne. Serve
on tiny crackers.

Mix flaked salmon or tuna, lemon juice, olives and/or pickles, minced
parsley and blue cheese; serve on rye bread.

Combine cottage cheese, chopped salted peanuts, and mayonnaise. Spread
on crackers.

Combine ground dried beef, grated onion, and pickles with cottage
cheese. Serve on crackers.


                            _Stuffed Celery_

Fill crisp stalks of celery with cottage cheese. Arrange them petal
fashion on a round chop plate, and fill the center with olives.




                                _Salads_


                      _Cheese and Lettuce Roll-Up_

  1 cup cottage cheese
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup chopped stuffed olives
  ½ cup walnut meats
  Mayonnaise to moisten

Roll a spoonful of the mixture in a large, crisp lettuce leaf; slip a
ring of green pepper around the center to hold it closed. Chill, then
serve with garnish of tomato wedges and cucumber slices. Enough filling
for 6 rolls.


                           _Two-Decker Salad_


                               LIME LAYER

  2 packages lime-flavored gelatin
  3 cups hot water
  1½ pounds cottage cheese, well drained
  1 tablespoon chopped onion
  1 tablespoon vinegar or lemon juice
  ¼ cup horseradish
  2 tablespoons mayonnaise

Dissolve gelatine in hot water. Chill until partially set. Beat until
light. Stir in remaining ingredients. Pour into 2½ quart mold which has
been rinsed in cold water. Chill until set.


                              TOMATO LAYER

  4 cups fresh-cooked (or canned) tomatoes
  ⅓ cup chopped onion
  ¼ cup chopped celery leaves
  1 bay leaf
  2 whole cloves
  1 teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons brown sugar
  2 tablespoons (2 envelopes) unflavored gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  3 tablespoons lemon juice
  2 hard-cooked eggs, sliced

Combine tomatoes, onion, celery leaves, bay leaf, cloves, salt and
sugar. Simmer 20 minutes; strain. There should be 3⅓ cups. Soften
gelatin in cold water, dissolve in hot tomato mixture. Add lemon juice.
Dip egg slices in gelatin and arrange against side of mold. Chill until
set. Pour in gelatin mixture; chill until firm. Unmold. Garnish plate
with endive. Top mold with flower of green pepper petals. Serves 12.


                         _Deviled Cottage Eggs_

  4 hard-cooked eggs, shelled
  ¼ teaspoon dry mustard
  2 teaspoons vinegar
  1 tablespoon chopped olives
  1 tablespoon pickle relish
  ½ to ¾ cups cottage cheese with chive
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper

Cut eggs in half lengthwise, remove yolks. Mash yolks; add mustard,
vinegar, chopped olives and relish. Add cottage cheese, mix well; season
with salt and pepper. Refill egg whites with mixture, piling it high.
Sprinkle with paprika, if desired. Serve in lettuce cups.


                      _Cottage Cheese Salad Ring_

  2 tablespoons plain, unflavored gelatin
  ½ cup cold water
  2 pounds cottage cheese
  1 cup cream or top milk
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1 teaspoon onion juice
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  Salt to taste

Soften gelatin in cold water; dissolve over hot water. Mix cottage
cheese, cream, lemon juice, onion juice, paprika, and salt; add
dissolved gelatin. Turn into a ring mold that has been rinsed with cold
water; chill until firm. Unmold on crisp salad greens and fill center of
ring with desired fruit or vegetable salad. Serve with mayonnaise or
French dressing. Serves 8.


                            _Avocado Salad_

Peel the avocados, cut each in half lengthwise and remove the pits. For
each serving place half of an avocado on curly endive, fill the center
with cottage cheese to which has been added some tart French dressing.


                    _Cottage Cheese-Filled Tomatoes_

  6 medium tomatoes
  2 cups dry cottage cheese
  ¼ cup mayonnaise or salad dressing
  3 tablespoons chopped pickle
  1 tablespoon minced onion
  3 tablespoons chopped pimiento
  3 tablespoons chopped walnut meats

Peel tomatoes; cut slices from top and scoop out center. Sprinkle with
salt; invert to chill. Combine remaining ingredients and mix well; fill
tomato cups. Chill thoroughly. Serve on lettuce with additional
mayonnaise. Serves 6.


                     _Cottage Cheese-Potato Salad_

  3 cups cooked diced potatoes
  ½ cup sliced celery
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon chopped pimiento
  2 tablespoons minced onion
  2 tablespoons chopped pickle
  1 cup mayonnaise
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon dry mustard
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  1 cup creamy cottage cheese

Combine potatoes, celery, green pepper, pimiento, onion, and pickle.
Chill. Blend mayonnaise, seasonings, and lemon juice. Pour over potato
mixture; add cottage cheese and toss lightly. Serves 6 to 8. A super
picnic salad!


                          _Chive Cheese Mold_

  1 package lemon-flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  1 cup cold water
  ½ large avocado
  1 cup chive cottage cheese
  6 tablespoons mayonnaise
  ⅓ cup chopped pecan meats

Dissolve flavored gelatin in hot water. Add cold water. Chill until
syrupy. Mash avocado; mix with cottage cheese, mayonnaise, and nut
meats, and add to thickened gelatin. Pour into mold and chill. Garnish
with orange slices or segments. Serves 6.


                         _Gingerale Fruit Mold_

  1 cup hot water
  1 package lemon flavored gelatin
  ¾ cup gingerale
  1 cup fruit cocktail, drained
  juice of ½ lemon


                                FILLING

  1 cup cottage cheese
  ¼ cup pecans
  4 maraschino cherries, sliced
  1 tablespoon cream
  1 tablespoon mayonnaise

Stir hot water into gelatin until dissolved. Chill until cool but not
thickened. Stir gingerale, fruit cocktail and lemon juice into cooled
gelatin; pour into ring mold rinsed in cold water. Chill until firm. At
serving time, combine cottage cheese, pecans, cherries, cream and
mayonnaise. Unmold fruit gelatin ring; fill center with cottage cheese
mixture. Serves 6.


                          _Cranberry Blizzard_

  1 pound whole cranberries
  2 cups water
  2 cups granulated sugar
  2 tablespoons plain gelatin
  ½ cup cold water

Boil cranberries in 2 cups water 5 minutes. Stir in sugar; boil 5
minutes longer. Soften gelatin in ½ cup cold water; dissolve in hot
cranberries. Pour into oiled 8-inch ring mold. Chill overnight. Unmold
on large salad plate; garnish with crisp lettuce. Pile creamy cottage
cheese in center of ring. This recipe is grand for buffet suppers, with
chicken or turkey. Serves 8.


                  _Frozen Cheese and Pineapple Salad_

  1½ cups cottage cheese
  ¾ cup whipping cream
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¾ cup drained, shredded pineapple
  ½ cup finely sliced dates
  ¼ cup mayonnaise, or salad dressing
  3 tablespoons lemon juice

Drain off excess moisture from cheese and beat with a fork or electric
mixer until smooth. Whip cream until stiff, then fold in cheese. Add
seasonings, well-drained pineapple, and dates; pour into a waxed
paper-lined freezing tray of the refrigerator. Freeze at coldest
temperature. Cut into slices, arrange on salad greens, and serve with
additional dressing. (Allow about three hours for freezing salad.)
Serves 6. Serve with nut bread and butter sandwiches for Dessert Bridge.


                 _Cottage Cheese and Strawberry Salad_

  2 cups cottage cheese
  2 cups sliced strawberries
  3 tablespoons honey French dressing


                                DRESSING

  ⅓ cup salad oil
  3 tablespoons lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅓ cup strained honey

Beat together the oil, lemon juice, and salt. Add honey slowly while
beating. Mix cottage cheese, strawberries, and French dressing. Put on
lettuce leaves. Garnish with mayonnaise and whole strawberry.


                          _Molded Fruit Salad_

  1 package lemon-flavored gelatin
  1 cup hot water
  ½ cup creamy cottage cheese
  1 cup heavy cream, whipped
  ½ cup broken walnut meats
  ½ cup maraschino cherries, quartered
  1 cup crushed pineapple, well drained

Dissolve gelatin in hot water. Chill until partially set. Fold in
cottage cheese and whipped cream, walnuts, cherries and pineapple. Pour
into 1-quart refrigerator tray. Chill until firm. Cut in squares to
serve. Serves 8. Delicious as salad or dessert!


                           _Peach Party Loaf_

  2 packages lemon-flavored gelatin
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 cup hot canned peach syrup
  1½ cups hot grapefruit juice
  1½ cups drained sliced canned cling peaches
  2 tablespoons chopped pimiento
  1¼ cups cottage cheese
  ½ cup chopped celery
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley
  1½ teaspoons grated onion
  ½ teaspoon salt
  Salad greens

Dissolve gelatin and ¼ teaspoon salt in hot syrup and fruit juice. Cool
until slightly thickened. Arrange peaches and pimiento in bottom of
oiled 9x5x3-inch loaf pan and cover with half the gelatin mixture. Chill
until firm. Add cottage cheese, celery, parsley, onion, and ½ teaspoon
salt to remaining gelatin and blend. Turn into pan over firm peach
layer. Chill until firm. Unmold on crisp greens. Serve in slices. Makes
8 to 10 servings.


                         _Cottage Cheese Ring_

  1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  1½ cups cottage cheese
  2½ tablespoons Roquefort cheese
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  ½ cup heavy cream, whipped
  Fruit salad

Soften gelatin in cold water; dissolve over hot water. Press cottage and
Roquefort cheese through sieve and mix thoroughly with gelatin, salt and
paprika. Fold in whipped cream. Pour into ring mold and chill until
firm. Unmold and fill center with fruit salad. Serve with mayonnaise
mixed with whipped cream. Serves 6.




                           _Salad Dressings_


                       _Cottage Cheese Dressing_

  1 cup cottage cheese
  2 tablespoons mayonnaise
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  Salt and pepper to taste

Combine all ingredients and blend well. Makes about 1 cup dressing.


                    _Cottage Cheese-Fruit Dressing_

  ½ cup cottage cheese
  ½ cup cream
  ½ cup lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon honey or sugar
  1 tablespoon chopped chives
  Dash paprika

Beat all ingredients together until smooth. Makes 1⅓ cups.


                  _Cottage Cheese-Vegetable Dressing_

  1 cup cottage cheese
  2 tablespoons vinegar
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon paprika
  ¼ teaspoon prepared mustard
  4 tablespoons catsup

Combine all ingredients, blend well.




                                _Breads_


                           _Cottage Pancakes_

  1 cup sifted flour
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon sugar
  2 egg yolks, slightly beaten
  1 cup milk
  2 tablespoons melted butter
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Sift flour once, measure, add baking powder, salt and sugar, and sift
again. Combine egg yolks and milk. Add gradually to flour mixture,
beating only until smooth. Add shortening. Fold in egg whites. Bake on
hot greased griddle. Spread with creamy cottage cheese, topped with
strawberry preserves.


                         _Filled Cheese Rolls_

  1 cake fresh yeast
  ¼ cup lukewarm water
  ¾ cup milk
  2 tablespoons butter
  ¼ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 egg, beaten
  3 cups sifted all-purpose flour


                                FILLING

  1 cup cottage cheese
  ½ cup peanut butter, crunch style

Soften yeast in lukewarm water. Heat milk to boiling point; remove from
heat and add butter, sugar, and salt. Cool to lukewarm; add yeast and
egg. Stir in flour, making a soft dough. Knead until satiny; place in a
bowl and cover with a damp cloth. Allow to rise until doubled in size,
about 1 to 1½ hours. Punch dough down and let it rest 10 minutes before
rolling out ¼ inch thick. Spread with filling; roll it up as for jelly
roll, and cut off 1-inch slices. Place cut side down on greased baking
sheet 1 inch apart. Cover, let rise until light. Bake in hot oven (400°
F.) 15 to 20 minutes.


                       _Cottage Cheese Blintzes_


                                 BATTER

  2 eggs
  1 cup water
  Dash of salt
  4 tablespoons flour

Beat two eggs. Add water and salt. Pour into flour slowly, stirring
vigorously to obtain a smooth, thin batter. Pour about one tablespoon of
batter into a small slightly greased frying pan, spreading very thin
over the entire bottom. Cook over low heat on one side only, until it
will hold its shape, but does not brown. Turn out on cloth or paper and
repeat with the rest of the batter.


                                FILLING

  1 egg
  1½ cups cottage cheese
  1 tablespoon melted butter
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon sugar
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ cup raisins (if desired)

Beat egg well. Add cottage cheese, melted butter, and seasoning. If
desired, ¼ cup raisins. Place 1 heaping tablespoon of the cheese mixture
on each blintze. Fold the edges over the filling and press in well. Cook
in butter until brown on both sides. Serve with sour cream.


                        _Cottage Cheese Crisps_

  1 cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  ⅓ cup butter or substitute
  1 tablespoon milk
  ½ cup cottage cheese
  Paprika
  ½ teaspoon celery seed (optional)

Sift together flour, salt, and baking powder. Cut in butter. Add milk to
cottage cheese, then stir into flour mixture. Round dough upon floured
board and roll it to ⅛-inch thickness. Cut into ½-inch strips. Place
strips on baking sheet and brush with milk; sprinkle with paprika and
celery seed. Bake in hot oven (425° F.) 10 to 12 minutes until lightly
browned.




                             _Main Dishes_


                         _Cottage Cheese Loaf_

  2 cups cooked lima beans (drain thoroughly)
  1½ pounds cottage cheese
  1 small can pimientos
  1 cup bread crumbs
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon pepper
  1 can condensed tomato soup

Put beans, cottage cheese and pimientos through a meat chopper, using
coarse blade. Mix well. Add bread crumbs and seasonings and form into a
roll. Bake in slightly greased pan, uncovered at 350° F., for about 30
minutes. Heat the tomato soup, pour over the loaf and bake about 15
minutes longer. Slice and serve with the tomato sauce.


                             _Mushroom Pie_

  2 tablespoons butter
  ¼ cup diced onion
  2 cups hot cooked potatoes
  1 3-oz. can chopped broiled mushrooms
  1 pound creamed cottage cheese
  ½ cup sour cream
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  ½ teaspoon gravy maker
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1 9-inch pastry shell, unbaked

Melt butter in small saucepan. Add onion and cook over moderate heat
five minutes, stirring occasionally. Meanwhile, cook and sieve potatoes.
Stir in mushrooms, cheese, sour cream, salt, pepper, gravy maker and
onions. Mix thoroughly. Fold in beaten eggs. Pour into unbaked shell.
Bake at 375° F., about one hour, or until puffy and brown. Serve hot as
main dish.


                      _Baked Macaroni and Cheese_

  ½ cup sliced green onions
  ¼ cup butter or cooking fat
  2 cups cooked macaroni
  2 cups cottage cheese
  2 tablespoons minced pimiento (optional)
  2 cups milk
  4 eggs, beaten slightly
  Salt, pepper, celery seed to taste
  1 cup ripe olives, seeded
  ½ cup minced parsley

Saute onions until soft, but not brown. Combine with all remaining
ingredients and pour into deep, bright pottery casserole. Bake an hour
at 350° F. Garnish top with paprika before serving.


                      _French Cottage Cheese Pie_

  1 unbaked 9-inch pie shell
  2 cups cottage cheese
  3¼ cups sour cream
  2 cups hot mashed potatoes
  1 teaspoon salt
  3 tablespoons finely chopped onion
  3 tablespoons chopped pimiento
  2 eggs, well beaten
  1½ tablespoons butter

Blend cottage cheese and sour cream together. Beat in mashed potatoes.
Mix thoroughly. Add salt, onion, pimiento. Fold in beaten eggs. Pour
into unbaked pie shell, dot with butter. Bake in moderate oven (350° F.)
1¼ hours, until golden brown. Serve hot as main dish. (Many French
families like this pie cold, with mixed green salad and a hot soup.)


            _Curried Cottage Cheese and Eggs in Rice Nests_

  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  ¾ cup milk
  1 teaspoon curry powder
  ½ teaspoon onion juice
  1½ cups cottage cheese
  Salt and pepper
  6 hard-cooked eggs
  Hot boiled rice

Melt butter in a double boiler. Add flour and mix well. Add milk
gradually and cook, stirring constantly, until thickened. Add curry
powder, onion juice, cottage cheese, and salt and pepper to taste. Fold
in the diced eggs, reserving six slices for garnish. Reheat. Serve on
nests of rice. Serves 6.


                        _Tuna-Cheese Pinwheels_

1 batch biscuit dough or mix


                                FILLING

  1 green onion, with stem, minced
  1 7-oz. can flaked tuna
  1 cup cottage cheese


                             MUSHROOM SAUCE

  1 4-oz. can mushrooms, with juice
  1 small onion
  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1½ cups milk

Make your favorite biscuit dough, or prepared mix. Combine onion, tuna,
cottage cheese. Roll dough ¼ inch thick, spread with tuna mixture; roll
as for jelly roll. Cut in ½ inch slices; place 1 inch apart on greased
cookie sheet. Bake 20-25 minutes at 250° F. Sauce: Chop mushrooms and
onion; saute in butter. Shake flour and seasonings in small jar with
mushroom juice. Add to mushroom and onion; blend in milk. Stir
constantly over low heat until thickened. Pour over pinwheels, allowing
2 per serving. Serves 6.


                _Cottage Cheese and Egg Plant Casserole_

  1 egg plant
  1 cup cottage cheese (dry)
  3 slices bread
  ½ onion, sliced
  1 green pepper, chopped
  1 whole pimiento, chopped
  pepper and marjoram
  1 egg
  2 tablespoons butter
  Paprika
  ½ teaspoon salt

Peel the egg plant and cube. Put in a sauce pan with ½ cup water and
cook covered for 15 minutes. Add unbeaten egg and 2 slices bread,
flaked. Stir in cottage cheese, onion and seasoning. Pour into buttered
casserole. Flake 1 slice bread over top, dot with butter, and sprinkle
with paprika. Bake in 350° F. oven for 45 minutes. Serves 4-6.


                          _Macaroni Romanoff_

Two kinds of cheese, cottage and a sharp Cheddar type, give this
macaroni dish unexpected flavor. It is complete enough for the main part
of a meal, a recipe that you will use frequently.

  3 cups cooked macaroni
  1 cup cottage cheese
  1 cup sour cream
  ¼ cup chopped onions
  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  ½ teaspoon salt
  4 drops Tabasco sauce
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley
  ¼ cup grated Cheddar-type cheese

Combine all ingredients except grated cheese. Place in greased
casserole. Sprinkle with cheese. Bake in a moderate oven (350° F.) about
40 minutes. Serves 4 to 6.


                           _Tuna-Cheese Bake_

  2 cups cottage cheese
  1 can tuna (7 oz.)
  ½ cup dry bread crumbs
  2 eggs, beaten
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  ¾ teaspoon celery salt
  Dash of steak sauce
  2 tablespoons butter

Combine cheese, tuna, ¼ cup bread crumbs, and seasonings. Blend into
beaten eggs. Place in oiled casserole (1 quart). Sprinkle with remaining
crumbs, buttered. Set in pan of hot water; bake in moderate oven (375°
F.) about 30 minutes or until mixture is firm. Serves 4.


                         _Cottage Cheese Puffs_

  1 cup sieved cottage cheese
  1 cup dry bread crumbs
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon onion salt
  1 teaspoon chopped parsley
  ½ cup chopped peanuts
  1 egg, beaten

Combine cottage cheese, ¾ cup bread crumbs, salt, onion salt, parsley
and peanuts with beaten egg; mix well. Shape into patties; roll in
remaining bread crumbs. Bake in greased muffin tins in hot oven (400°
F.) 10 minutes. Served with spicy Spanish sauce.


                           _Cottage Timbales_

  1½ cups cottage cheese
  1½ cups cooked rice or fine noodles
  1 cup finely diced or chopped cooked meat
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  1 teaspoon minced onion
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup milk
  3 eggs, slightly beaten
  1¼ cups tomato juice
  2 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon sugar
  Salt and pepper to taste

Combine cottage cheese, rice or cooked noodles, meat, green pepper,
onion, salt, milk and eggs and blend. Fill well oiled custard cups with
the mixture and set in a shallow pan of water. Bake in a 350° F. oven
for about 45 minutes, or until a knife inserted in the center comes out
clean. Unmold and serve with tomato sauce.


                                 SAUCE

Melt butter in a small saucepan, add flour and blend. Add tomato juice
and cook and stir until smooth and thickened. Season with sugar, salt
and pepper. Serve over cottage timbales. Serves 6.


                        _Cottage Cheese Rarebit_

  4 tablespoons butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon dry mustard
  2 cups buttermilk
  Salt and pepper to taste
  Dash of cayenne
  ½ cup cottage cheese

Melt the butter in a saucepan. Add flour and mustard, blending well.
Then slowly stir in the buttermilk. Cook slowly for about three minutes,
then add the cottage cheese and other seasonings. One hard-boiled egg,
chopped fine, may also be added. Serve on hot buttered toast.


                        _Cottage Cheese Souffle_

  1 cup cottage cheese
  ¼ cup buttermilk
  1 cup soft bread crumbs
  3 eggs
  4 tablespoons butter
  3 tablespoons flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon baking soda
  Dash of cayenne

Melt butter in skillet, add flour, salt and cayenne. Mix thoroughly, add
all the buttermilk at once and stir until smooth. Then add the cottage
cheese, soda and bread crumbs. Beat the eggs until light and fluffy and
add to the cheese mixture. Pour into a well-greased baking dish, and
bake for about 30 minutes at 350° F. Serve at once with a hot cheese
sauce, made by adding snappy American or Cheddar cheese to a medium
white sauce.


                        _Cheese-Stuffed Onions_

  6 medium onions
  ¾ cup cottage cheese
  2 tablespoons finely chopped green pepper
  3 slices bacon cut in strips and fried crisp
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  ¼ cup buttered bread crumbs
  4 strips pimiento

Peel onions and cook in boiling salted water until just tender (about 20
minutes). Drain and cool. Remove centers, leaving a thin shell. Chop ½
cup of centers coarsely. Combine with cottage cheese, green pepper,
bacon, salt, and pepper. Mix well. Stuff onion shells and place in
greased baking dish. Garnish with bread crumbs and pimiento. Pour 1
teaspoon bacon drippings over each onion. Cover and bake in moderate
oven (350° F.) for 20 minutes. Uncover and brown 10-15 minutes. Serves
6.


                          _Sweet Potato Cups_

  2 pounds large sweet potatoes
  3 large oranges
  1 cup cottage cheese
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  1 teaspoon salt

Boil potatoes. Peel and mash thoroughly. Cut oranges in halves, remove
pulp, discard white pith and membrane. Combine orange segments and juice
with ginger, cottage cheese, mashed sweet potatoes. Fill orange shells.
Broil in slow oven (350° F.) until glazed. Serve immediately.
Sensational with buffet ham. Serves 6.


                        _Cottage Cheese Omelet_

  4 eggs, separated
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  ¼ cup milk
  ¾ cup cottage cheese
  3 tablespoons chopped canned pimiento
  1 tablespoon butter
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley

Beat egg yolks until thick; add salt, pepper, milk, cheese and pimiento.
Fold in stiffly beaten egg whites. Place butter in skillet, heat well
and add omelet. Cook slowly until firm and browned on bottom. Bake in
moderate oven (350° F.) 10 to 15 minutes or until browned on top.
Crease, fold, slip onto hot platter and garnish with parsley. Serves 6.


                         _Cottage Creamed Eggs_

  3 tablespoons butter
  3 tablespoons flour
  Salt and pepper to taste
  1 cup milk
  ½ teaspoon minced pimiento
  ¼ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
  2 hard cooked eggs, sliced
  1 cup cottage cheese

Melt butter. Blend in flour, salt, pepper. Gradually stir in milk; cook
until thick and smooth, stirring constantly. Season with pimiento and
Worcestershire. Add sliced eggs and cottage cheese. Heat. Serve on
buttered toast.


                  _Baked Potatoes With Cottage Cheese_

Halve large baked potatoes. Scoop out centers. Mash thoroughly. For 6,
combine 2 cups cottage cheese and one egg. Mix with potatoes. Season.
Refill shells. Dust with paprika: Return to hot oven. Bake until brown
on top.


                    _Mashed Potato and Cheese Puff_

Mash potato thoroughly with desired milk and seasoning. Blend about 1
part cottage cheese to 4 parts potato. Place in casserole, dust with
paprika and brown in oven. Add chopped parsley as garnish, before
serving.


                           _For Taste Appeal_

For a crusty brown topping on oven dishes, spread them generously with
cottage cheese; sprinkle with bread crumbs, and bake.

Use cottage cheese as a topping for one-crust berry pies.

Add approximately ½ cup cottage cheese to scrambled eggs to extend
flavor and quantity. Cook over low heat.

Spread cottage cheese on thin French pancakes, roll up, and fry lightly;
and serve with sour cream and jam, or sugar and cinnamon.




                               _Desserts_


                        _Cheese Custard Pudding_

  2 cups cottage cheese
  4 eggs, beaten slightly
  1 quart milk, scalded
  3 tablespoons flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup sugar
  1 teaspoon vanilla extract
  ¼ teaspoon almond extract

Put cottage cheese through a sieve. Beat eggs together slightly; add
scalded milk, stirring to blend. Mix dry ingredients; add sieved cottage
cheese. Gradually stir in milk-egg mixture; add vanilla and almond
extract. Pour into a well-buttered 8-inch glass baking dish. Place in a
pan of hot water and bake in a moderate oven (325° F.) for 1½ hours or
until a knife inserted in the center comes out clean; let cool. Serves 6
to 8.


                     _Lemon-Cottage Cheese Custard_

  ½ cup melba toast crumbs, rolled and sifted
  1 cup sugar
  ¼ cup butter, melted
  2 egg yolks
  Juice of 1 lemon
  Rind of 1 lemon, grated
  ¼ teaspoon mace
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 cups cottage cheese
  3 tablespoons flour
  ½ cup milk
  ½ cup whipping cream
  2 egg whites
  ⅓ cup nut meats, chopped

Combine crumbs, ½ cup sugar, and butter; line buttered baking dish. Beat
egg yolks with remaining sugar, add lemon juice and rind, mace and salt,
then cottage cheese and flour blended with milk. Mix all thoroughly and
sieve. Add whipped cream and stiffly beaten egg whites. Mix lightly and
pour into crumb-lined baking dish, sprinkle with nut meats. Set in pan
of hot water and bake in a moderate oven (325° to 350° F.) 1 hour. Serve
cold with whipped cream or crushed strawberries. Serves 8.


                    _Spiced Cottage Cheese Cookies_

In these refrigerator cookies the cheese provides the liquid content.

  ½ cup shortening
  ½ cup sugar, brown or granulated
  1 egg
  1¾ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon each nutmeg and cloves
  ⅓ cup cottage cheese, sieved

Cream shortening and sugar together; beat in egg. Sift flour with soda,
salt, and spices into bowl; add cottage cheese. Stir together to make a
stiff dough. Form into roll; wrap in waxed paper and chill well in the
refrigerator. Slice thin, and bake in a moderate oven (375° F.) 10
minutes or until lightly browned. Makes about 2½ dozen cookies.


                       _Cottage Cheese Cup Cakes_

  ½ cup butter
  2 cups brown sugar, firmly packed
  Grated rind of 1 lemon
  1 egg
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 cup chopped raisins
  2 cups creamed cottage cheese (or 2 cups dry cottage cheese plus 3
              tablespoons milk)
  ½ teaspoon soda

Cream butter and one cup of the brown sugar until light and fluffy. Add
lemon rind and egg and beat well. Add cottage cheese and second cup of
brown sugar and mix thoroughly. Sift flour once, measure, and resift
with the dry ingredients. Blend with cottage cheese mixture. Fold in
raisins. Bake in greased muffin pans at 350° F., for 30 minutes, or
until done. Serve warm. Makes about 2 dozen cupcakes.


                         _Unbaked Cheese Cake_


                                FILLING

  2 tablespoons unflavored gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  4 eggs, separated
  1 cup table cream
  ¾ cup sugar
  2 cups cottage cheese, sieved
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  Juice of 2 lemons
  Grated peel of 1 lemon
  ½ cup heavy cream, whipped


                                 CRUST

  2 cups graham cracker or zweiback crumbs
  ½ cup melted butter
  ¼ cup confectioner’s sugar

Soften gelatin in water for 5 minutes. In the top of the double boiler
beat egg yolks slightly; stir in softened gelatin, table cream, and
sugar. Place over boiling water and cook, stirring constantly, until the
mixture coats a spoon. Remove from heat; stir in cottage cheese, salt,
vanilla, lemon juice, and peel. Cool. Fold in cream. While filling is
cooling, combine ingredients for crust; take out ⅓ of mixture and set
aside. Use remainder of crumbs to line bottom and sides of a spring mold
or deep 9-inch layer cake pan. Pour filling into pan. Sprinkle remaining
crumbs on top. Chill several hours before serving.


                         _Cottage Cheese Cake_

  2 cups fine melba toast crumbs
  1½ cups sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup melted butter
  6 eggs
  1½ tablespoons lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup coffee cream
  3 cups cottage cheese sieved
  ¼ cup flour
  2 teaspoons grated lemon rind
  ¼ cup chopped nuts
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine crumbs with ½ cup sugar, cinnamon, and butter. Reserve ¾ cup of
mixture for top and press balance into bottom of a 9-inch pie pan. Beat
eggs and add sugar gradually. Add lemon juice, salt, cream, cheese and
flour. Mix well. Add rind. Pour into pie tin and sprinkle with reserve
crumbs. Bake 1 hour in moderate oven (350° F.). Chill and remove from
pan.


                           _Fruit Cheese Pie_

  1 unbaked 9-inch pastry shell
  1½ cups thinly sliced raw apples
  2 eggs
  ¾ cup cottage cheese
  ½ cup sugar
  ½ cup cream
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  Dash of nutmeg

Line a pie pan with pastry and cover the bottom with the sliced apples.
Beat the eggs slightly, add the cottage cheese, ½ cup of sugar, cream,
salt and lemon rind. Mix 3 tablespoons of sugar with the cinnamon and
nutmeg, sprinkle this over the apples, then cover them with the cottage
cheese mixture. Bake in a moderately hot oven (425° F.) 10 minutes;
reduce the heat to a moderate oven (350° F.) and bake 30 minutes longer.


                       Raisin-Cottage Cheese Pie

  1 pound cottage cheese
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¼ cup milk
  3 eggs, beaten
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup chopped raisins or dates
  Rind and juice of 1 lemon
  1 teaspoon melted butter
  ½ recipe pastry

Press cheese through a fine sieve. Add next 7 ingredients and stir until
well mixed. Line a deep pie pan with pastry and bake in hot oven (450°
F.) until crust is very light brown. Fill with cheese mixture and
continue baking in moderate oven (350° F.) until filling is firm, 15 to
20 minutes. Makes 1 (9-inch) pie.


                              _Melody Pie_


                           LEMON PASTRY SHELL

  1 cup sifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup shortening
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  1½ tablespoons lemon juice
  1 tablespoon ice water
  2 teaspoons beaten egg yolk

Sift together flour and salt. Cut in shortening and lemon rind. Beat
together lemon juice, water and egg yolk. Stir lightly into flour
mixture. Form into ball; wrap in waxed paper and chill. Roll out dough
and line 9-inch pie plate. Prick well; bake 10 to 15 minutes in
moderately hot oven (425° F.).


                                FILLING

Line shell with 1 pint creamed cottage cheese, mixed with 1 tablespoon
grated lemon rind. Fill with 1 No. 2½ can fruit cocktail, chilled and
drained. Garnish with mint. Serves 8.


                            _Buttermilk Pie_

  2 eggs
  ½ cup melted butter
  2 tablespoons flour
  1 cup sugar
  2 teaspoons vanilla
  2 teaspoons lemon juice, or 1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
  1½ cups buttermilk
  ½ pound cottage cheese
  Pastry

Beat egg yolks slightly; add butter, and beat until thoroughly blended.
Beat in flour, ½ cup sugar, vanilla, lemon juice, buttermilk, and
cottage cheese that has been pressed through a sieve. Beat egg whites,
add ½ cup sugar gradually, and beat until stiff; fold into mixture. Pour
into 9-inch pie pan lined with pastry; bake in a hot oven (450° F.) for
15 minutes, then lower temperature to slow (300° F.) and continue baking
40 minutes, or until set. Chill before serving. Note: there’s an
abundance of filling here so you should roll out the pastry until the
circle is about 4 inches larger than the top diameter of the pie plate.
Fit the pastry into the pan, then trim with shears, leaving a 1½ inch
overhanging border. Fold this border up and make an upright double-fold
rim; flute with fingers.


                             _Cheese Bowl_

  ¾ cup sieved cottage cheese
  ¼ pound Roquefort cheese, sieved
  1 tablespoon sour cream
  Few drops Worcestershire Sauce
  Crackers
  Fruit

Mix cottage cheese, Roquefort cheese and sour cream just enough to
blend. Add Worcestershire sauce to taste. Serve in bowl. Six servings.
Mellow cheese served with tart fruit and crackers makes an elegant
dessert.


    For additional copies of this booklet mail 15c coin or stamps to

                        MILK INDUSTRY FOUNDATION
                            1625 Eye Street
                          Washington 6, D. C.

    [Illustration: MILK INDUSTRY FOUNDATION]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COTTAGE CHEESE RECIPE BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cheese and its economical uses in the diet
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cheese and its economical uses in the diet

Author: C. F. Langworthy
        Caroline Louisa Hunt

Release date: February 18, 2023 [eBook #70067]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Government Printing Office, 1916

Credits: Bob Taylor, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHEESE AND ITS ECONOMICAL USES IN THE DIET ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  Issued February 26, 1912.
  1434 Reprinted with slight changes, June, 1916.

  U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.

  FARMERS’ BULLETIN 487.


  CHEESE AND ITS ECONOMICAL
  USES IN THE DIET.


  BY

  C. F. LANGWORTHY, PH. D.,
  _Chief of Office of Home Economics, States Relations Service_,

  AND

  CAROLINE L. HUNT, A. B.,
  _Expert in Nutrition, Office of Home Economics_.


  [Illustration: UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE]


  WASHINGTON:
  GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
  1916.




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.


  U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
  STATES RELATIONS SERVICE,

  _Washington, D. C., June 10, 1916_.

SIR: Since cheese is one of the important agricultural products
of the United States and a foodstuff used in a larger or smaller
quantity in nearly every American home, it seemed desirable to study
its relative nutritive value and the ways in which it may be prepared
for the table.

Although it is so generally liked, there seems to be a widespread
belief that it is not well digested and that it is a cause of
physiological disturbances. Neither of these beliefs is substantiated
by the results of the extended series of digestion experiments
undertaken as part of the nutrition investigations of the Office
of Home Economics. Indeed, cheese was found to be very thoroughly
digested, ranking with other staple foods in this respect. Moreover,
experiments made with the respiration calorimeter did not indicate
that it was less easy of digestion than a comparable amount of meat.

In the studies of the digestibility of cheese the Bureau of Animal
Industry cooperated with the States Relations Service and was also of
great assistance in securing, for experimental purposes, cheese made
and cured under controlled conditions. Supplementing the experiments
as to the nutritive value of cheese, many tests were made of methods
of preparing cheese for the table, the main purpose being to suggest
dishes and combinations of such a character that the cheese might
replace other nitrogenous material and fat when this seemed desirable.

The bulletin was prepared by C. F. Langworthy, chief of the Office of
Home Economics of the States Relations Service, and Miss Caroline L.
Hunt, who has had wide experience in the study of both scientific and
practical problems in nutrition. The recipes were collected from many
sources and in the majority of cases were studied experimentally by
Miss Hunt.

Acknowledgement should be made to teachers of home economics in
agricultural colleges and other educational institutions, to
housekeepers, and others who have supplied data of great value in
preparing the bulletin.

  Respectfully,      A. C. TRUE,
                      _Director_.

  Hon. D. F. HOUSTON,
  _Secretary of Agriculture_.




CONTENTS.


                                                                 Page.

  Introduction                                                       5

  Cheese making                                                      7

  Kinds of cheese used in American homes                             8

  Cheddar and American full-cream cheese                             8

  English dairy cheese                                               9

  Soft cream cheeses                                                 9

  Neufchâtel cheese                                                  9

  Parmesan cheese                                                   10

  Sap Sago                                                          10

  Gorgonzola and Roquefort                                          10

  Potted or sandwich cheeses                                        10

  Swiss cheese (Emmentaler, Gruyère, etc.)                          10

  Edam cheese                                                       10

  Brie and Camembert cheese                                         11

  Cottage cheese                                                    11

  The care of cheese in the home                                    11

  Cheese as a food                                                  11

  The flavor of cheese                                              12

  Composition of cheese and some other foods compared               12

  Nutritive value and cost of cheese and some other food materials  14

  Amounts of protein and energy obtained for 10 cents expended for
  cheese and other foods at certain assumed prices per pound        14

  The digestibility of cheese                                       15

  The use of cheese in the diet                                     16

  Bill-of-fare making with cheese as the central food               17

  Homemade cheese                                                   19

  Curds and whey                                                    19

  Cottage cheese                                                    19

  Sour-cream cheese                                                 20

  Uncooked curd, or French cottage cheese                           20

  Junket                                                            20

  Buttermilk cheese                                                 20

  Buttermilk cream                                                  21

  Devonshire cream                                                  21

  Cheese dishes and their preparation                               21

  Cheese dishes which may be used in the same way as meat           22

  Cheese sauce No. 1                                                22

  Cheese sauce No. 2                                                23

  Cheese sauce No. 3                                                23

  Cheese sauce No. 4                                                23

  Cheese fondue No. 1                                               24

  Cheese fondue No. 2                                               24

  Boiled fondue                                                     25

  Rice fondue                                                       25

  Corn and cheese soufflé                                           25

  Welsh rabbit                                                      25

  Tomato rabbit                                                     26

  Green corn, tomato, and cheese                                    26

  Macaroni and cheese No. 1                                         26

  Macaroni and cheese No. 2                                         26

  Macaroni and cheese and tomato sauce                              26

  Italian macaroni and cheese                                       26

  Cheese and macaroni loaf                                          27

  Baked rice and cheese No. 1                                       27

  Baked rice and cheese No. 2                                       27

  Baked crackers and cheese No. 1                                   27

  Baked crackers and cheese No. 2                                   28

  Cheese rolls                                                      28

  Boston roast                                                      28

  Pimiento and cheese roast                                         28

  Nut and cheese roast                                              28

  Cheese and spinach roll                                           28

  Vegetable and cheese rolls                                        29

  Cheese used in the stuffing of meat                               29

  Creamed cheese and eggs                                           29

  Baked eggs with cheese                                            29

  Scrambled eggs with cheese                                        29

  Swiss eggs                                                        29

  Cheese omelet No. 1                                               30

  Cheese omelet No. 2                                               30

  Cheese omelet No. 3                                               30

  Breakfast cereals with cheese                                     30

  Oatmeal with cheese                                               30

  Cheese with mush                                                  31

  Fried bread with cheese No. 1                                     31

  Fried bread with cheese No. 2                                     31

  Roman gnocchi                                                     31

  Cheese soufflé                                                    31

  Cheese soufflé with pastry                                        31

  Cheese croquettes                                                 32

  Fried cheese balls                                                32

  Cheese soups and vegetables cooked with cheese                    32

  Milk and cheese soup                                              32

  Cheese and vegetable soup                                         32

  Scalloped potatoes with cheese No. 1                              33

  Scalloped potatoes with cheese No. 2                              33

  Scalloped cabbage or cauliflower with cheese                      33

  Cheese with potato puffs                                          33

  Potatoes with cheese sauce                                        33

  Cheese salads, sandwiches, and similar cheese dishes              33

  Cheese with salads                                                33

  Plain cheese salad                                                34

  Olive and pimiento sandwich or salad cheese                       34

  Cheese and tomato salad                                           34

  Cheese and pimiento salad                                         34

  Cheese jelly salad                                                34

  Cheese salad and preserves                                        34

  Deviled eggs with cheese                                          34

  Cheese and celery                                                 35

  Buttermilk cream salad dressing                                   35

  Buttermilk cream horseradish salad dressing                       35

  Cheese sandwiches                                                 35

  Cheese and anchovy sandwiches                                     35

  Pimiento, olive and cheese sandwiches                             35

  Cuban sandwiches                                                  35

  Toasted cheese sandwiches                                         35

  Cheese pastry, cheese sweets, and similar dishes                  35

  Cheese pastries and similar dishes                                36

  Cheese biscuits No. 1                                             36

  Cheese biscuits No. 2                                             36

  Cheese drops                                                      36

  Cheese wafers                                                     37

  Cheese relish                                                     37

  Cheese straws                                                     37

  Salad biscuit                                                     37

  Cheese gingerbread No. 1                                          37

  Cheese gingerbread No. 2                                          37

  Cheese custard                                                    37

  Cheese cakes                                                      37

  Brown Betty with cheese                                           38

  Conclusion                                                        38




CHEESE AND ITS ECONOMICAL USES IN THE DIET.




INTRODUCTION.


Cheese is believed to be the oldest of the dairy products and the
first form in which milk was preserved for future use. One may
conjecture that it owes its origin to the accidental storing and
ripening of sour milk curd. Although it has been a staple food with
many races for uncounted years, there is a widespread belief that
it is suitable for use chiefly in small quantities as an accessory
to the diet, and that in large quantities it is likely to produce
physiological disturbances. We are inclined, therefore, to think of
those who make cheese one of the chief articles of their diet as
being driven to this course by necessity rather than being led to it
by choice.

Because of these opinions extensive studies have been carried
on as a part of the Department Work in Home Economics, of the
food value, thoroughness of digestibility, ease of digestion,
physiological effect, and special character of cheese as food as
well as of methods which are followed in preparing it for the
table. The conclusion drawn from this extended study is, in brief,
that cheese properly prepared and used is not generally a cause of
physiological disturbances, and that it may easily be introduced
into the bill of fare in such quantities as to serve as the chief
source of nitrogenous food and may be made a substitute for other
nitrogenous foods when such substitution is desired.[1] The results
of these studies have been brought together in this bulletin with a
view to making them helpful to all interested in the subject, but
particularly to housekeepers.

From the standpoint of the housekeeper, cheese is of importance
because of its high nutritive value, particularly its high percentage
of protein or muscle-forming materials, because of the ease with
which it can be kept and prepared for the table, and because of its
appetizing flavor and of the great variety of ways in which it can be
served.

From the point of view of agriculture cheese is an important
commodity. The latest census figures available show that considerably
over 300,000,000 pounds are made yearly in the United States, the
value of the product being nearly $29,000,000, and the amount of
money invested being over $6,000,000. The figures quoted are from
the census report which first separated the details of the cheese
industry from those of the butter and condensed-milk industries.
From earlier statistics available, however, it is fair to judge in a
general way of the development of any one of these industries from
the figures given for the three industries combined. In general,
these figures show that there was a great leap forward in the three
industries in the decade between the years 1880 and 1890, and that
since that time there has been a continuous, steady, healthy growth
in the business of cheese making.

As might be expected, the amount of the product and the amount of
money invested have increased more rapidly than the number of men
employed, indicating that, as in most manufacturing industries,
labor-saving devices and other improvements have reduced the
proportion of physical labor required.

As regards the kind of cheese made in the United States, the figures
show that of the amount produced in 1905 approximately three-fourths
was what is known to the trade as standard factory cheese, or what
is usually known to the retail purchaser as American cheese. A very
small per cent—1.1 per cent—was skim-milk cheese, the remainder
being American modifications of certain important foreign brands,
Neufchâtel, Camembert, and others.

From the standpoint of the retail dealer, cheese is important because
it is a convenient article to handle. Its percentage of nutrients
being high and its percentage of water low, it is not bulky. It
is comparatively easy, too, to preserve in good condition. The
difficulty of cutting exact amounts called for by customers may
be considered the chief inconvenience. Efforts have been made to
obviate this difficulty by making small cheeses. Experiments have
been reported from the Oregon Experiment Station[2] on the canning of
cheese in pound lots; and from the Wisconsin Experiment Station[3]
in making cheese prints like those in which butter is commonly sold.
In some of the factories cheeses weighing about 5 pounds and having
the same shape as the larger cheeses are made. These are convenient
for use in families where a large amount of cheese is eaten, and
furthermore cheese in such form dries out and spoils less quickly and
easily than cheese cut in wedge-shaped slices, as it usually is when
sold by the pound. A convenient way of keeping and using such cheese
is given on page 11.

The sale of cheese in pots is another way of overcoming the
difficulty of cutting exact amounts. Cheese thus prepared is, as a
rule, softened by the addition of butter fat or other fat, with the
idea of making it of such consistency that it can be used like soft
cheeses.

There is something to be said also of the value of cheese to that not
inconsiderable number of individuals who must occasionally cater for
themselves—those men and women in business life, for example, who
find it convenient neither to carry lunches nor to go to restaurants.
For these, cheese offers a convenient way of supplying the necessary
protein, for it can usually be obtained in good condition in any
neighborhood. Combined with crackers, some of the ready-cooked
cereals, or bread, and with fruit, it makes a fairly well-balanced
meal.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] U. S. Dept. Agr., Yearbook 1910, p. 359.

[2] Oregon Sta. Bul. 78.

[3] Wisconsin Sta. Rpt. 1901, p. 132; U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmers’ Bul.
156.




CHEESE MAKING.


Though the chief points in the manufacture of cheese are well
known, and are discussed in detail in other publications[4] of this
department, it may not be out of place to review them here. Cheese is
made ordinarily from whole milk, and most of the kinds best known in
the United States from cows’ milk. In every 8 parts of milk by weight
there is approximately 1 part of solid nutrients, the remainder being
water. For our present purpose we may think of the nutrients as being
equally divided into three groups—protein substances (casein and
albumin principally), fat, and milk sugar. In the process of cheese
making the casein, which constitutes more than three-fourths of the
proteids of the milk, is precipitated by rennet, forming a curd. Most
of the fat attaches itself to this curd. The curd is broken up, and
the whole is heated to a temperature between 96° and 108° F. The whey
is drained off and carries with it most of the milk sugar and the
albumin. The curd is salted and pressed. It is kept for several weeks
or longer in a cool place, where it “ripens,” developing flavors
through the action of bacteria or other microorganisms, and also
undergoing certain other marked changes.

The average cheese while fresh and moist contains proteids and fat
in much the same ratio as that in which they are found in the milk.
More than one-fourth its weight is proteid, about one-third fats, and
one-third water. There are always present small amounts of albumin
and sugar which have clung to the curd. Owing to the addition of
salt, the percentage of mineral matter is high compared with that of
most other foods.

In ripening, cheese changes in texture and its original pastiness
gives away to a somewhat granular consistency in some types, or to a
waxy or a buttery consistency in others.

The above brief outline refers only to the essentials of cheese
making. In practice, there are many variations with respect to the
kind of milk used, the proportion of butter fat or cream retained
in or added to the milk, with respect to the methods followed in
separating, preparing, seasoning, and handling the curd, and to
the handling and ripening of the cheese. It follows that there is
an almost endless number of cheeses with different names and of
different appearance and flavor.

Cheese making was formerly a home or farm industry, but is now, in
the United States at least, very largely a commercial enterprise
carried on in factories. It differs from many industries in that the
factories are almost always located in the country or in the smaller
towns rather than in large cities, this being more true of cheese
making than of the manufacture of potted cheeses or other special
articles, which has become a large industry. It is worthy of mention
in this connection that the making of cheese crackers and other
bakers’ goods in which cheese is an ingredient has developed into an
important part of the baking trade.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmers’ Buls. 166, 225, 244; Bur. Anim. Indus.
Buls. 105, 146.




KINDS OF CHEESE USED IN AMERICAN HOMES.


The American factory cheese—the so-called American cream cheese—is
of the English Cheddar type, and as it is the most commonly used
of all the commercial varieties in the United States, may be taken
as a standard. Other types are, however, well known, particularly
in cities and large towns where there are well-stocked markets and
stores, and it is interesting to note also, at least briefly, the
characteristics of some of them. Full descriptions of a very large
number of cheeses (about 250 in all) may be found in an earlier
bulletin of this department.[5]


CHEDDAR AND AMERICAN FULL-CREAM CHEESE.

Cheddar cheese—named from the English village where it originated—is
a comparatively old type of cheese, very popular in England and also
in the United States. The name is now more fitly applied to a process
than to any particular shape.

Cheddar cheese is made from sweet cows’ milk, which may be skimmed,
partly skimmed, or unskimmed. If made from unskimmed milk the cheese
is called “full cream.” If cream is removed the cheese is designated
“part-skim” or “skim,” as the case may be.

Cheese of Cheddar type as made in the United States is perhaps most
often marketed in large, flat, round forms, 13 to 16 inches in
diameter, about 5 or 6 inches in height, and weighing 26 to 32 pounds
each, though other shapes and sizes are also fairly common. It is
usually pale to darker yellow in color, though it may be white when
uncolored. When fresh it is mild in flavor, but when well ripened
has a characteristic and sharp taste. The new cheese is soft, though
not waxy, in texture, and may be easily shaved or broken into small
pieces. When well ripened it may be finely grated.

These characteristics, together with its distinctive and peculiar
flavor and its wide distribution in the markets, are qualities which
help to make it the variety most commonly used in the United States.

Sage cheese is a variety of Cheddar cheese, which is flavored with
sage and is further characterized by the green mottled appearance
formerly due to bits of sage leaf but now generally obtained in
another way.


ENGLISH DAIRY CHEESE.

From the standpoint of the cook who frequently wishes to use grated
cheese this variety is important. Though made in much the same way as
Cheddar, it differs from it, in that the curd is heated to a somewhat
higher temperature, and the cheese is therefore harder. It commonly
sells for somewhat more per pound than the standard or American
factory variety and is likely to be found only in the larger markets.


SOFT CREAM CHEESES.

Cream cheese true to name is made from rich cream thickened by
souring or from sweet cream thickened with rennet. The whey is
removed by draining. It is then covered, salted, and turned
occasionally, being ready for market in 5 to 10 days. A variety is
also made with rennet from cream of low fat content, as well as a
number of other special sorts much more common in France than in the
United States.

The term “cream cheese,” however, is an elastic one and includes many
varieties which are sold under special trade names. Such cheese is
common in most markets.

Soft cream cheese differs from standard cheese, so far as composition
is concerned, in having more water and fat and less protein, water
usually making up about one-half of the total weight. It differs also
in being much more perishable. These cheeses commonly sell for 10 or
15 cents each, which is about 40 to 50 cents a pound.

Of late there have been on the market varieties of such cheese or of
Neufchâtel, made by combining the cheese with chopped pimiento. These
bring a relatively high price in market and may be easily prepared at
home if this seems more convenient. (See p. 34.)


NEUFCHÂTEL CHEESE.

This very popular variety—named from a town in northeastern France—is
similar in appearance and in the way it is marketed to soft cream
cheese. It is made either from whole or skim milk curdled with
rennet. After draining and pressing, it is kneaded thoroughly, formed
into small rolls or blocks, and then ripened until special molds
develop, which requires about four weeks. It is then wrapped in
tinfoil and marketed.


PARMESAN CHEESE.

This is a name given outside of Italy to a very hard cheese which in
that country is said to be known as Grana, a name given because of
the granular appearance which it has after it has been broken. It is
sometimes sold in grated form and brings a relatively high price, but
is more commonly sold ungrated. When well made it will keep for years
and may be easily broken and grated. It is very generally used in
Europe for serving with soups, for seasoning macaroni, and for other
similar purposes, and is quite common in American markets.


SAP SAGO.

This is a skim-milk cheese made in Switzerland, which is suitable
for grating. It contains, for every 4 pounds of cheese, 1 pound of a
clover (_Melilotus cæruleus_) grown in Switzerland. It is greenish in
color and has an unusual flavor. It is not high-priced.


GORGONZOLA AND ROQUEFORT.

These are highly flavored cheeses characterized by the presence of
molds through their entire mass. Roquefort is made from the milk of
sheep; Gorgonzola, from cows’ milk.


POTTED OR SANDWICH CHEESES.

Ordinary cheese is often mixed with butter or oil in the proportion
of 5 parts of cheese to 1 of butter or oil, by weight. The mixture is
sometimes seasoned with mustard or with curry powder. Such cheeses,
unseasoned or seasoned, are on the market in great variety. Potted
cheese may be easily prepared at home if the housekeeper wishes to
take the trouble.


SWISS CHEESE (EMMENTALER, GRUYÈRE, ETC.).

This term as used in America is somewhat vague. Different names are
given to the varieties according to the districts of Switzerland in
which they are made, but they are all similar and characterized by
a mild, sweetish flavor and the presence of large holes or “eyes.”
Foreign and domestic brands are to be found in most markets. They
are suitable for cooking purposes, as well as for use without being
cooked, and are much used in this way in Europe and well known and
liked in the United States.


EDAM CHEESE.

This is a cheese made in Holland. It is molded in spherical form, and
the outside is usually dyed red. It is usual in this country to cut
off a section of the top, which serves as a lid, and to scoop out
the inside as needed. In Holland it is frequently served in slices,
particularly when it is fresh. Edam cheese is seldom used in cookery
in American homes, though thrifty housewives, after the greater part
of the cheese has been removed, often stuff the hollow shell with
cooked and seasoned macaroni, rice, or something similar and bake.


BRIE AND CAMEMBERT CHEESE.

These are very soft rennet cheeses of foreign origin and of somewhat
smaller nutritive value than standard cheese, and of strong flavor
and odor. They are not often used in cookery, but are used as an
accompaniment to other foods. The Bureau of Animal Industry and
the Connecticut Storrs Experiment Station in cooperation have
experimented with the making of Camembert cheese with marked success,
and have published a full account of the work.[6]


COTTAGE CHEESE.

Cottage cheese and other sour milk and cream cheeses, junket,
Devonshire cream, and a number of other cheese-like products are
described in the section which deals with homemade cheese.


FOOTNOTES:

[5] U. S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Anim. Indus. Bul. 146.

[6] U. S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Anim. Indus. Buls. 71, 98, 109, 115, 120,
Circ. 145; Conn. Storrs Sta. Buls. 35, 46, and 58.




THE CARE OF CHEESE IN THE HOME.


One of the best ways of keeping cheese which has been cut is to wrap
it in a slightly damp cloth and then in paper, and to keep it in a
cool place. To dampen the cloth, sprinkle it and then wring it. It
should seem hardly damp to the touch. Paraffin paper may be used in
place of the cloth. When cheese is put in a covered dish, the air
should never be wholly excluded, for if this is done, it molds more
readily.

In some markets it is possible to buy the small whole cheeses
mentioned on page 6. These may be satisfactorily kept by cutting a
slice from the top, to serve as a cover, and removing the cheese
as needed with a knife, a strong spoon, or a cheese scoop. It is
possible to buy at the hardware stores knobs which inserted in the
layer cut from the top make it easy to handle. The cheese below the
cover should be kept wrapped in a cloth.




CHEESE AS A FOOD.


Cheese is used in general in two ways—in small quantities chiefly for
its flavor and in large quantities for its nutritive value as well
as for its flavor. Some varieties of cheese are used chiefly for the
first purpose, others chiefly for the second. Those which are used
chiefly for their flavor, many of which are high priced, contribute
little to the food value of the diet, because of the small quantity
used at a time. They have an important part to play, however, in
making the diet attractive and palatable. The intelligent housekeeper
thinks of them not as necessities, but as lying within what has been
called “the region of choice.” Having first satisfied herself that
her family is receiving sufficient nourishment, she then, according
to her means and ideas of an attractive diet, chooses among these
foods and others which are to be considered luxuries.

Those cheeses, on the other hand, which are suitable to be eaten in
large quantities and which are comparatively low priced are important
not only from the point of view of flavor, but also from the point of
view of their nutritive value. Among such cheeses the one which, as
noted above, is known to the trade as standard factory cheese and to
the housewife as American cheese stands out pre-eminently. Therefore
when the word “cheese” is used without specification in the following
pages it may be taken to refer to this particular variety.




THE FLAVOR OF CHEESE.


Cheese owes its flavor to the fatty acids and their compounds which
it contains and to ammonia-like bodies formed during ripening from
the cleavage of the casein, to salt added to the curd, and in some
varieties, like Roquefort, to bodies elaborated by molds which
develop in the cheese. In the highly flavored sorts some of the fatty
acids of a very marked odor are present in abundance, as are also the
ammonia-like bodies. Indeed, in eating such cheese as Camembert a
trace of ammonia flavor may often be plainly detected.

The cleavage of the nitrogenous material of the cheese and other
changes are brought about chiefly by the action of enzymes originally
present in cheese or by microorganisms and are to be regarded as
fermentative and not as putrefactive changes.

The liking for highly flavored cheeses of strong odor is a matter of
individual preference, but from the chemist’s standpoint there is no
reason for the statement often made that such cheeses have undergone
putrefactive decomposition.




COMPOSITION OF CHEESE AND SOME OTHER FOODS COMPARED.


In the present state of our knowledge concerning dietetics it seems
best to give the housekeeper general rather than absolute rules with
respect to the kind and amount of food which should be eaten at any
meal or at any given time by persons in normal health living under
usual conditions. It is not necessary, therefore, for the housekeeper
to know the exact composition of food materials in order to cater
well for her family, a rough approximation being sufficient for
the purpose. In the case of cheese she will be near enough to the
fact if she thinks of it as composed approximately of equal parts
by weight of proteids, fats, and water. This rough conception is
sufficient to associate it in her mind with the foods of high proteid
value, a point which is important in connection with the making of
bills of fare. It should lead her to class it also with the foods
which are rich in fat and prevent her from combining it unnecessarily
with other fatty foods.

In order, however, that the question of the use of cheese in the
diet may be adequately discussed, knowledge of its composition in
comparison with other foods is desirable, and there is an abundance
of data available on this subject, since the composition of cheese
and other foods has often been investigated at the Department of
Agriculture, in experiment station laboratories, and in many other
places where nutrition problems are studied. An extended summary
of analyses of cheese of different sorts is included in an earlier
publication of this department.[7]

Data regarding the composition of cheese and a few other common foods
are summarized in the following table:

_Average composition of cheese and some other common foods as
purchased, and also on the basis of edible portion._

  ----------------------+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------
                        |         |           |           |
   Food materials.      | Refuse. |  Water.   | Protein.  |    Fat.
                        |         |           |           |
  ----------------------+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------
                        |_Per     |_Per       |_Per       |_Per
                        | cent._  | cent._    | cent._    | cent._
  Cheese                |         |     34.2  |     25.2  |     33.7
  Beef of average       |         |           |           |
  composition as        |         |           |           |
      purchased         |   18.6  |     50.5  |     15.2  |     15.5
    Edible portion      |         |     62.2  |     18.8  |     18.8
  Porterhouse steak     |         |           |           |
      as purchased      |   12.7  |     52.4  |     19.1  |     17.9
    Edible portion      |         |     60.0  |     21.9  |     20.4
  Loin steak, broiled,  |         |           |           |
  edible portion        |         |     54.8  |     23.5  |     20.4
  Dried beef            |         |     53.7  |     26.4  |      6.9
  Eggs as purchased     |   11.2  |     65.5  |     13.1  |      9.3
    Edible portion      |         |     73.7  |     13.4  |     10.5
  Milk                  |         |     87.0  |      3.3  |      4.0
  Bread                 |         |     35.3  |      9.2  |      1.3
  Potatoes as purchased |   20.0  |     62.6  |      1.8  |       .1
    Edible portion      |         |     78.3  |      2.2  |       .1
  Apples as purchased   |   25.0  |     63.6  |       .3  |       .3
    Edible portion      |         |     84.6  |       .4  |       .5
  ----------------------+---------+-----------+-----------+-----------

  ----------------------+--------------+------------+-----------
                        |              |            |   Fuel
   Food materials.      |Carbohydrates.|    Ash.    | value per
                        |              |            |   pound.
  ----------------------+--------------+------------+-----------
                        |_Per cent._   |_Per cent._ |_Calories._
  Cheese                |       2.4    |      3.8   |    1,950
  Beef of average       |              |            |
  composition as        |              |            |
      purchased         |              |       .7   |      935
    Edible portion      |              |       .9   |    1,145
  Porterhouse steak     |              |            |
      as purchased      |              |       .8   |    1,110
    Edible portion      |              |      1.0   |    1,270
  Loin steak, broiled,  |              |            |
  edible portion        |              |      1.2   |    1,300
  Dried beef            |              |      8.9   |      790
  Eggs as purchased     |              |       .9   |      635
    Edible portion      |              |      1.0   |      720
  Milk                  |       5.0    |       .7   |      310
  Bread                 |      53.1    |      1.1   |    1,215
  Potatoes as purchased |      14.7    |       .8   |      295
    Edible portion      |      18.4    |      1.0   |      385
  Apples as purchased   |      10.8    |       .3   |      190
    Edible portion      |      14.2    |       .3   |      290
  ----------------------+--------------+------------+-----------

It will be seen from the above table that cheese has nearly twice
as much protein, weight for weight, as beef of average composition
as purchased and that its fuel value is more than twice as great.
It contains over 25 per cent more protein than the same weight of
porterhouse steak as purchased, and nearly twice as much fat.

As shown by the figures in the above table, cheese contains 3.8
per cent ash. Of this a considerable part may be salt added in
cheese making. Like the milk from which it is made, cheese ash is
characterized chiefly by the presence of calcium (lime), magnesium,
phosphorus, and iron, the average values as given in earlier
bulletins of the department[8] being 1.24 per cent calcium oxid,
0.049 per cent magnesium oxid, 1.49 per cent phosphorus pentoxid, and
0.0015 per cent iron.

The total amount of the mineral matter needed per day by the body
is relatively small, yet mineral matter is very important. It is
commonly assumed and is probably true, that a mixed diet reasonably
varied and reasonably generous will supply all the ash constituent
which the body requires. If for any reason calcium and phosphorus are
lacking in the diet, the amounts may be readily increased (as pointed
out in one of the publications just cited) by a free use of milk
and such milk products as cheese and junket, without decreasing the
palatability of the diet or materially increasing its cost.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] U. S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Anim. Indus. Bul. 146.

[8] U. S. Dept. Agr., Office Expt. Stas. Buls. 185 and 227.




NUTRITIVE VALUE AND COST OF CHEESE AND SOME OTHER FOOD MATERIALS.


Since the market prices of foods vary, it is difficult to compare
the amounts of nourishment secured for a given sum, 10 cents say,
in buying different food materials. We may, however, suppose that
foods have certain prices and make the comparison on this basis. In
the following table the amount of cheese obtained for 10 cents when
cheese costs 22 cents a pound is shown, together with the protein and
energy value of this quantity, this value being compared with similar
values for a number of other common foods at certain assumed prices
per pound.


_Amounts of protein and energy obtained for 10 cents expended for
cheese and other foods at certain assumed prices per pound._

  --------------+---------------------+----------+----------------------
                |                     |          | 10 cents’ worth will
                |                     | 10 cents |      contain—
   Food         |       Price.        |   will   |----------------------
     materials. |                     |  buy—    |          |  A fuel
                |                     |          | Proteid. | value of—
  --------------+---------------------+----------+----------+-----------
                |                     |_Ounces._ |_Ounces._ |_Calories._
  Cheese        | 22 cents per pound  |      7.3 |      1.9 |     886
  Beef, average | 20 cents per pound  |      8.0 |      1.2 |     467
  Porterhouse   |                     |          |          |
    steak       | 25 cents per pound  |      6.4 |      1.3 |     444
  Dried beef    |      do             |      6.4 |      1.6 |     315
  Eggs          | 24 cents per dozen  |     10.0 |      1.3 |     198
  Milk          | 9 cents per quart   |     38.3 |      1.2 |     736
  Wheat bread   | 5 cents per pound   |     32.0 |      2.9 |   2,400
  Potatoes      | 60 cents per bushel |    160.0 |          |   2,950
  Apples        | 1½ cents per pound  |    106.7 |          |   1,270
  --------------+---------------------+----------+----------+-----------

Since cheese is ready to be eaten when it comes from the market, it
may be more interesting for some purposes to compare its composition
with that of cooked beef, freed from bone and from superfluous fat,
such a piece as would be served to a person at the table. Weight for
weight, cheese has appreciably more protein than such cooked beef,
and 50 per cent more fat.

So far as its composition is concerned, then, cheese is entitled to
be considered as directly comparable with meat. The possibilities
of using cheese and some other food materials in the same way as
meat is discussed in some detail in an earlier publication of this
department.[9] It is so used by the peasants of some parts of Europe,
and was formerly so used among many other groups of people. The fact
that it is not more commonly so used in this country is probably due
to several causes. One cause is habit, which makes the meal seem
incomplete unless it includes meat; another is the fact that since
cheese has a more pronounced flavor than meat, it is not so likely to
be generally acceptable as the chief food of a meal. There is always
likely to be at least one member of the family who does not relish it
in quantity. Another cause is the fact that it is commonly believed
to be indigestible, and still another is the fact that housekeepers,
through lack of experience, are much less skillful in the arrangement
of bills of fare in which cheese is the central food than they are in
arranging bills of fare in which meat is thus used. These last two
causes will be considered in sections which follow.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] U. S. Dept. Agr., Yearbook 1907, p. 367.




THE DIGESTIBILITY OF CHEESE.


As was stated above, cheese has been thought a cause of digestive
disturbances, but work recently done by the Office of Experiment
Stations, in cooperation with the Bureau of Animal Industry, and
briefly summed up in a recent publication tends to disprove this.[10]

In the large number of experiments which were conducted, young men in
good health were fed on a diet consisting of bread and fruit combined
with American factory cheese which was made with different amounts
of rennet and in different stages of ripening. The results showed
that over 90 per cent of the nitrogenous material of the cheese was
digested—that is, retained in the body—and nearly 90 per cent of the
energy it supplied was available. In other words, cheese compares
favorably with other foods in thoroughness of digestion—that is,
in the percentage finally digested. Furthermore, it did not cause
constipation or other physiological disturbances.

The above statement refers to full-cream cheese. Experiments made at
the same time gave practically the same values for the digestibility
of skim-milk cheese, of Swiss cheese, of Roquefort and Camembert
cheese, and of cottage cheese.

Artificial digestion experiments made at the Minnesota Agricultural
Experiment Station[11] indicate that cheese protein is digested by
the ferments of the intestines rather than by those of the stomach,
and this is suggested as a reason for its reputation as a “hearty”
food, the belief being that some foods which remain in the stomach
longer than the average time, or are not digested by the stomach, are
“hearty.” Cheese protein (casein) is intimately associated with fat,
and there is experimental evidence to show that this condition has an
effect upon the progress of digestion in the stomach.

The burning sensation or similar sensations sometimes experienced
after eating certain sorts of cheese has been attributed to the
presence of small amounts of free fatty acids.[12] It is commonly
said that cheese is difficult to digest, the idea being that the body
expends more labor in assimilating it than is required for other
comparable foods. Experiments recently carried on by the Office of
Experiment Stations in which the respiration calorimeter was used to
study the energy expenditure during the period of active digestion,
do not indicate that cheese differs materially in ease of digestion
from a comparable amount of meat.[13] Uncooked full-cream cheese
was used in these experiments. Another series recently begun by the
Office of Experiment Stations with cooked cheese, though not yet
sufficiently advanced to be conclusive, indicates that cheese thus
eaten does not differ materially from raw cheese in this respect.

In connection with the use of cooked cheese in the diet, one fact
should always be kept in mind. This is that, in common with all
other fatty foods, cheese which has been overheated in cooking is
likely to contain burned—that is, decomposed—fats. Disturbances from
this cause, however, should be laid to poor cooking and not to the
composition of this special food.

The use of potassium bicarbonate has often been recommended for
increasing the digestibility of cheese, the amount suggested being a
level teaspoonful to a pound of cheese. That the bicarbonate renders
the cheese soluble in any appreciable degree, as has been claimed,
is not apparent from a number of experiments which have been made.
It does, however, neutralize some of the free fatty acids of the
cheese, thus destroying some of the characteristic flavor. To some
people this may be an advantage, but to others it would be counted a
disadvantage.


FOOTNOTES:

[10] U. S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Anim. Indus. Circ. 166.

[11] Minnesota Sta. Bul. 74.

[12] Hutchison’s “Food and the Principles of Dietetics,” London,
1901, p. 145.

[13] U. S. Dept. Agr., An. Rpt. Sec. 1910, p. 149; Rpt. Office Expt.
Stas. 1910, p. 35; Yearbook 1910, p. 359.




THE USE OF CHEESE IN THE DIET.


It has been the purpose, in preparing this discussion of cheese,
to consider ways in which mild-flavored sorts may serve as staple
articles of diet, rather than the use of highly flavored varieties
as appetizers and as accompaniments of other foods. The use
of highly flavored cheese as a condiment is customary and may
profitably be extended, since it offers a simple way of adding to
the attractiveness of the diet. The variety of the cheese selected
is a matter of choice, some persons preferring such kinds as
well-ripened American full-cream cheese or the potted cheeses, and
others such sorts as Roquefort, Camembert, and other varieties.
From the physiologist’s standpoint, cheese used in this way for its
flavor should really form a part of a well-balanced meal rather than
be added to a meal which already supplies an abundance of nutritive
material. In other words, condimental cheeses may better accompany a
moderate than a very generous menu.

In considering the use of cheese in quantity as an integral part of
the diet there are many possibilities from simple combinations like
bread and cheese to elaborate dishes in which cheese is used as a
flavor and as a principal constituent.

As has been pointed out, cheese, being rich in both protein and fat,
would logically replace such foods as meat, fish, and eggs when
taken in quantity, rather than cereal foods characterized by a large
amount of starch, or succulent foods, such as vegetables and fruits.
In planning menus of which cheese forms a large part the housekeeper
should bear these facts in mind.




BILL-OF-FARE MAKING WITH CHEESE AS THE CENTRAL FOOD.


Since meat has so generally been the chief protein food of a meal,
and the kind selected usually has determined the choice of vegetables
and condiments, it is not strange that very many housekeepers should
be inexperienced and consequently unskillful in planning meals in
which cheese is substituted for meat when for any reason they may
desire to make such a change. In seeking skill they might take a
suggestion from the experiments to which reference has been made,
and also from a case investigated and reported by the Office of
Experiment Stations, of a man who lived for months upon a diet of
bread, fruit, and cheese, and who remained in good health and active,
and did not weary of the monotony of the diet.

The first two articles of the diet mentioned, namely, the bread and
the cheese, could have been taken in such amounts as to constitute
what is usually considered a balanced ration, i.e., in such amounts
as to supply the right quantity of muscle-forming foods in comparison
with the energy value. The bread and cheese taken with the fruit,
however, make a ration which is well balanced not only in the older
and more widely accepted sense, but also in the more modern sense
that it makes an attractive and palatable combination of foods, as
well as a balanced ration, and thus favors digestion. The watery and
refreshing fruits or succulent vegetables with their large supply
of cellulose are a pleasant contrast to the concentrated and fatty
cheese.

Housekeepers would probably find that if in planning menus of which
a cheese dish is the chief feature they were to take pains to supply
also crisp, watery vegetables, water cress, celery, lettuce served
with a dressing or with salt alone, or simple fruit salads, and would
give preference to refreshing fruits, either fresh or cooked, rather
than to what are known as heavy desserts, they would in general be
more successful in pleasing those who are served.

There is another point also to be considered in combining cheese with
other foods. Whether it is raw or cooked it is likely to be somewhat
soft, and so seems to call for the harder kinds of bread—crusty
rolls or biscuit, zweiback, toast, pulled bread, rye bread, the
harder brown breads, or crackers, and some of the numerous crisp
ready-to-eat cereal breakfast foods. Brittle cookies, too, seem more
suitable than rich soft cakes or puddings for the dessert in such
meals.

A few bills of fare are given below which experience has shown to
represent combinations of dishes which are palatable and which, if
eaten in usual amounts, will supply protein and energy in proportions
which accord with usual dietary standards. Menus such as these are
more commonly served at lunch or at supper, but they might equally
well be served for dinner, the selection of dishes for any meal being
of course chiefly a matter of custom and convenience for those who
have any range of choice.


_Suggested bills of fare in which cheese dishes are the chief source
of protein and fat._

  MENU NO. 1.

  Macaroni and cheese (p. 26 or p. 27).
  Raisin bread or date bread.
  Orange and water-cress salad.
  Baked apples.
  Sugar cookies.
  Cocoa.


  MENU NO. 2.

  Cheese fondue (p. 24 or p. 25).
  Toast, zwieback, or thin and crisp baking-powder biscuit.
  Celery.
  Potatoes, baked, boiled, or fried in deep fat.
  Peas, or some other fresh vegetables.
  Coffee.
  Fruit salad with crisp cookies or meringues.


  MENU NO. 3.

  Clear soup.
  Baked eggs with cheese (p. 29) or Boston roast (p. 28).
  Baked potatoes.
  Lettuce salad.
  A sweet jelly, crab apple or quince for example, or a preserve.
  Rye bread.
  Orange or banana shortcake.
  Tea.

These bills of fare should be taken as suggestive merely and not as
a solution of the problem. In fact, the whole art of making bills of
fare needs developing. There is abundant evidence that overeating,
where it exists, is frequently due to the fact that meals are not
skillfully planned. People often continue eating after they have
taken enough in total bulk because they have not had all they want
of some particular kind of food. The meal has contained too large a
percentage of proteid or too much starch; has been too moist or too
dry; too highly flavored or not sufficiently flavored. Bill-of-fare
making calls not only for knowledge of food values but also for skill
in combining flavors and textures.

In this discussion of menu making, and of the use of cheese as an
integral part of the diet, the aim has been to suggest ways of
using cheese to add to the palatability of meals made up of usual
dishes, and to suggest dishes containing cheese which could serve as
substitutes for meat dishes when so desired, and also for dishes of
many sorts to be used as taste suggests and in which the nutritive
value as well as the flavor is increased by the addition of cheese.
If cheese is used and in quantity, it is obvious that some other
proteid and fat foods should be diminished, in order that the meal or
day’s menu may not be unduly hearty.

For the convenience of the housekeeper, a number of recipes for
cheese dishes are given in later pages, these being preceded by
directions for making cottage cheese and other similar cheeses which
are usually made in the home.




HOMEMADE CHEESE.


Even as late as a generation or two ago cheese of different kinds was
made at home for family use, as sour-milk or cottage cheese still is,
and cheese making was very generally a farm industry, cheese, like
butter, being sold by the farmer who made it. Cottage cheese is very
commonly homemade. Most types of cheese, however, are now as a rule
made on a large scale in factories where advantage may be taken of
labor-saving devices. The general topic of farm cheese making has
been considered in an earlier bulletin of this series,[14] prepared
by the Dairy Division of the Bureau of Animal Industry.


Curds and Whey.

  Cheese curds and whey, an old-fashioned dish, which is often spoken
  of in accounts of life in earlier times, sometimes refers to
  sour-milk curd and sometimes to curd separated with rennet. This
  dish when made with rennet is much like junket and though far less
  common to-day than was once the case is wholesome and palatable.


Cottage Cheese.

  This cheese is very commonly prepared in the home, and the process
  of making it is very simple. It consists merely of curdling the
  milk, separating the curd from the whey, seasoning, and pressing it.

  The curd is formed by the souring of the milk, and the process is
  hastened if the milk is kept warm, the best temperature being about
  blood heat, 96° F. A temperature much above this should be avoided,
  as the curd is likely to become hard and tough if much heated. The
  danger is usually not that the whole will be overheated but that
  the portion nearest the fire will be. In the old-fashioned kitchen
  there was usually a place where the milk could stand till it was
  uniformly warm throughout. With our present cooking arrangements
  it is often desirable to hasten the process. This may be done by
  setting the milk into a pan of warm water or by pouring hot water
  directly into the milk itself. The effect of the latter method
  is to remove much more of the acid than when the whey is left
  undiluted. Some consider this a great advantage.

  If, for any reason, the curd is overheated, it should be put
  through a meat chopper. This will insure cottage cheese of
  excellent texture.

  If the milk is thoroughly chilled before the whey is drained off
  it retains more of the fat than if this is done when warm. Under
  no circumstances, however, is much of the fat retained in cottage
  cheese. It is therefore more economical to make it out of skim milk
  and to add the fat to the curd in the form of butter or cream.

  Chopped parsley, caraway seeds, chopped olives, and pimiento may
  all be used for flavoring if such flavored cheese is preferred to
  plain cottage cheese.

  Cottage cheese[15] is most commonly consumed immediately, but if
  made in quantity for commercial purposes, it may be packed in tubs
  and placed in cold storage. Sometimes it is formed into rolls or
  blocks and wrapped in tinfoil when marketed. Such cheese is used
  without ripening.

  Though cottage cheese is usually made by allowing the milk to sour
  naturally, it is sometimes more convenient to curdle the milk by
  adding rennet, and some housekeepers have a preference for cottage
  cheese thus made, since the flavor is milder and the acid taste
  which it possesses when made from sour milk is lacking.


Sour-Cream Cheese.

  When cream is to be made into cheese similar to cottage cheese,
  it should be drained without having previously been heated. The
  drainage is facilitated by moistening the cloth in salt water
  before the cream is poured in. The curd is formed either by souring
  or by the addition of rennet.


Uncooked Curd, or French Cottage Cheese.

  The French make cheese from sour milk without heating it. They pour
  the milk into earthen molds which have holes in the bottom. A very
  fine sieve may be used instead of the molds. The whey drips out and
  the curd assumes a custard-like consistency and takes the shape of
  the mold. When sufficiently stiff, the cheese is chilled, and is
  eaten with sweet cream and sugar. It is a staple dessert in many
  French families, especially in hot weather, and is delicious served
  with acid fruit, such as currants, or with strawberries.


Junket.

  If cottage cheese is made from sweet milk and rennet and served
  without breaking and separating the curd and whey, the dish is
  called junket. It is customary to season it a little, as with
  grated nutmeg or with cinnamon and sugar.


Buttermilk Cheese.

  At the Wisconsin Experiment Station[16] a method has been devised
  for making a soft moist cheese out of buttermilk. When made on
  a large scale, as it might be in creameries, there are various
  precautions to be taken which are pointed out in the publication
  cited. In making it in small quantities, these precautions are
  unnecessary, and the method is even simpler than that of making
  cottage cheese, because the quality does not depend so much on the
  temperature.

  To make the buttermilk cheese, heat buttermilk gradually to about
  130° or 140° F. Allow it to cool and strain it. As the curd will
  settle to the bottom, most of the whey may be poured off before the
  draining is begun.

  This cheese is, of course, almost wholly without fat and yet,
  probably because the particles of curd are very finely divided,
  it has a smooth consistency, which suggests the presence of fat.
  It may be served seasoned with salt only or it may be mixed with
  butter or cream and seasonings. It is suitable for combining with
  olives and pimientos, as recommended on page 34, or for any use to
  which the ordinary cream cheeses are put.

Buttermilk Cream.

  This product also was devised by the Wisconsin Experiment
  Station.[17] By controlling the temperature in heating the
  buttermilk and not allowing it to go above 100° F., a compound
  is made which after draining has the consistency of a very thick
  cream. It is claimed by the station investigators that this “cream”
  is suitable for eating on bread in place of butter.

  The recipes on pages 34 and 35 suggest ways of making a salad
  dressing out of buttermilk cream.


Devonshire Cream.

  Devonshire cream somewhat resembles sweet cream in flavor and
  consistency. It is very much liked in England, where it is commonly
  eaten with fresh or preserved fruit, but is not so well known in
  America.

  To make Devonshire cream, allow a pan of whole milk to stand for
  24 hours in a cool place or for 12 hours in a warmer place. Place
  the pan on the cooler part of the stove and heat until the milk is
  very hot, but not to the boiling point. If heated too much a thick
  skin will form on the surface. The more slowly the milk is heated
  the better. Having been heated, the milk should be kept in a cool
  place for 24 hours and then skimmed. The thick cream obtained has a
  characteristic flavor and texture.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmer’s Bul. 166.

[15] North Carolina Sta. Bul. 210.

[16] Wisconsin Sta. Bul. 195.

[17] Loc. cit.




CHEESE DISHES AND THEIR PREPARATION.


The list of cheese dishes in the culinary literature of this and
other countries is a long one, but most of them are variations of a
comparatively small number of general types. Those which have been
selected and studied experimentally represent the principal types and
in many cases have been adapted to American methods of preparations
and tastes. In some instances, this has resulted in new and perhaps
more rational combinations than those which served as models.

For convenience, the cheese dishes included in this bulletin have
been grouped under the following heads:

  (1) Cheese dishes which may serve as meat substitutes.
  (2) Cheese soups and vegetables cooked with cheese.
  (3) Cheese salads, sandwiches, and similar dishes.
  (4) Cheese pastry, cheese sweets, and similar dishes.

Variety may be obtained in the recipes by varying the flavorings.
Among the best flavorings for cheese dishes are onion, chives, and
the ordinary green sweet pepper. Since the cheese needs very little
cooking, however, and onion or the pepper needs a great deal, they
should always be previously cooked, either by stewing in a very
little water, or by cooking in butter. The seeds of the pepper,
of course, should be removed before cooking. Where chopped celery
is used, as it may be in most of these dishes, it, too, should be
cooked beforehand until tender. Other good flavors are mustard, curry
powder, onion juice, chopped olives, pimiento, and, according to
European recipes, nutmeg or mace.

In preparing the cheese it often has been found convenient to use a
very coarse grater having slits instead of the usual rounded holes.
Such a grater, in spite of its name, shaves the cheese instead of
grating it. When the cheese is soft this is an advantage, since the
grater does not become clogged.




CHEESE DISHES WHICH MAY BE USED IN THE SAME WAY AS MEAT.


Meat is wholesome and relished by most persons, yet it is not
essential to a well-balanced meal and there are many housekeepers
who for one reason or another are interested in lessening the amount
of meat which they provide or to substitute some other foods for it.
The problem with the average family is undoubtedly more often the
occasional substitution of other palatable dishes for the sake of
variety, for reasons of economy, or for some other reason than the
general replacement of meat dishes by other things.

Foods which are to be served in place of meat should be rich in
protein and fat and should also be savory. Cheese naturally suggests
itself as a substitute for meat, since it is rich in the same kinds
of nutrients which meat supplies, is a staple food with which
everyone is familiar, and is one which can be used in a great variety
of ways. In substituting cheese for meat, especial pains should
be taken to serve dishes which are relished by the members of the
family. A number of recipes for dishes which contain cheese are given
below. They are preceded by several recipes for cheese sauces which,
as will appear, are called for in the preparation of some of the more
substantial dishes.


Cheese Sauce No. 1.

  1 cupful of milk.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  1 ounce of cheese (¼ cupful of grated cheese).
  Salt and pepper.

  Thicken the milk with the flour and just before serving add the
  cheese, stirring until it is melted.

  This sauce is suitable to use in preparing creamed eggs, or to pour
  over toast, making a dish corresponding to ordinary milk toast,
  except for the presence of cheese. It may be seasoned with a little
  curry powder and poured over hard-boiled eggs.


Cheese Sauce No. 2.

  Same as cheese sauce No. 1, except that the cheese is increased
  from 1 to 2 ounces.

  This sauce is suitable for using with macaroni or rice, or for
  baking with crackers soaked in milk. (See p. 27.)


Cheese Sauce No. 3.

  Same as cheese sauce No. 1, except that two cupfuls of grated
  cheese or 8 ounces are used. This may be used upon toast as a
  substitute for Welsh rabbit.


Cheese Sauce No. 4.

  Same as cheese sauce No. 2, save that 2 tablespoonfuls of melted
  butter are mixed with the flour before the latter is put into the
  milk. This sauce is therefore very rich in fat and has only a mild
  flavor of cheese.

Among the recipes for dishes which may be used like meat, the first
30 are such that, eaten in usual quantities, they will provide much
the same kind and amount of nutritive material as the ordinary
servings of meat dishes used at dinner. In several cases there is a
resemblance in appearance and flavor to common meat dishes, which
would doubtless be a point in their favor with many families.

While, chiefly owing to custom, it may not accord with the taste of
the family to serve cheese dishes at dinner in place of meat, it
is much more in accord with usual dietary habits in American homes
to serve such dishes at least occasionally for lunch, for supper,
or for breakfast; that is, for a less formal meal than dinner. The
last group of recipes in this section, beginning with “breakfast
cereals with cheese,” supply rather smaller proportions of nutritive
materials than those in the first group and so may be more suitable
for use at the less hearty meals. There is no hard and fast line to
be drawn between the two groups, however, and many of the recipes may
be used interchangeably.

In the recipes calling for large amounts of cheese the food value
is given, not in figures, but in comparison with beef of average
composition and average percentage of waste. This comparison is
necessarily rough owing to the varying composition of the foods
and the varying weights of such ingredients as a cupful of grated
cheese or bread crumbs. In making the comparisons, beef of average
composition has been considered to have 15.2 per cent of protein,
and a fuel value of 935 calories per pound; ordinary American cheese
has been considered to have 26 per cent of protein and a fuel value
of 1,965 calories per pound. After many weighings, 4 ounces was
decided to be the average weight of a cupful of cheese and 2½ ounces
the average weight of a cupful of bread crumbs. These weights have
been taken, therefore, in calculating the food value of dishes.
When cheese is very soft, however, it may be pressed into a cup and
measured like butter. Under these circumstances, the weight of a
cupful of cheese may be considered one-half a pound. The price of
cheese is taken as 22 cents a pound, of butter 25 cents a pound,
of eggs 25 cents a dozen, in this and all similar calculations in
this bulletin. Prices vary with time, place, and season. Those
mentioned above are such as were paid for materials at the time the
experiments here summarized were made and are not extreme values in
either direction. Like all such estimates, the calculations are only
relative, and the housekeeper who wishes to estimate the comparative
cost of the cheese dishes and other foods can readily do so by taking
into account the amount of materials used and the prices paid for
ingredients at any particular time.


Cheese Fondue No. 1.

  1⅓ cupfuls of soft, stale bread crumbs.
  6 ounces of cheese (1½ cupfuls of grated
    cheese or 1⅓ cupfuls of cheese grated
    fine or cut into small pieces.)
  4 eggs.
  1 cupful of hot water.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Mix the water, bread crumbs, salt, and cheese; add the yolks
  thoroughly beaten; into this mixture cut and fold the whites of
  eggs beaten until stiff. Pour into a buttered baking dish and cook
  30 minutes in a moderate oven. Serve at once.

  The food value of this dish, made with the above quantities, is
  almost exactly the same as that of a pound of beef of average
  composition and a pound of potatoes combined. It contains about 80
  grams of proteids and has a fuel value of about 1,300 calories.
  Estimated cost, 18 cents, calculated as explained on p. 23.


Cheese Fondue No. 2.

  1⅓ cupfuls of hot milk.
  1⅓ cupfuls of soft, stale bread crumbs.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  4 eggs.
  ⅓ of a pound of cheese (1⅓ cupfuls of grated
    cheese or 1 cupful of cheese cut into
    small pieces).
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Prepare as in previous recipe.

  The protein value of this dish is equal to that of 1⅛ pounds of
  potato and beef, the fuel value, however, being much in excess of
  these. Calculated cost (see p. 23), 22 cents.

  In making either of these fondues, rice or other cereals may be
  substituted for bread crumbs. One-fourth cupful of rice measured
  before cooking, or one cupful of cooked rice or other cereals,
  should be used.

  A comparison of the recipes for the two fondues may indicate the
  general principle on which the recipes in this bulletin have been
  worked out. The second recipe is one commonly found in cookbooks.
  In the first one, the butter has been omitted and water substituted
  for milk and the amount of cheese is slightly increased. This makes
  a somewhat cheaper dish and one which is less rich because its
  percentage of fat is not so great. For this reason it is easier
  to adjust to the ordinary bill of fare. A dish in which there is
  combined cheese with its large percentage of fat, butter with its
  85 per cent of fat, and eggs with their 10 per cent of fat, is
  too rich to admit of being combined rationally with other fatty
  dishes. It therefore limits the number of dishes that may be served
  with it, making milk soup, for example, or dishes containing white
  sauce or those containing much butter or oil seem out of place. The
  omission of butter from the ordinary recipes and the substitution
  of water or skimmed milk for whole milk may perhaps be the means of
  making cheese dishes more wholesome and more generally acceptable.

  Another advantage of omitting butter from cheese dishes and of
  substituting water or skimmed milk for whole milk is that it makes
  it possible to increase the amount of cheese without making the
  dish too rich. This is of advantage to those who like the flavor of
  cheese, and also, because it tends to increase the tissue-forming
  value of the dish, particularly if skimmed milk is used rather than
  water.


Boiled Fondue.

  1½ cupfuls of bread crumbs.
  1½ cupfuls of milk.
  1½ cupfuls of cheese cut into small pieces.
  1 egg.
  2 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  6 ounces of crackers.

  Soak the bread in the milk. Melt the butter and add the cheese.
  When the cheese has melted add the soaked crumbs, the eggs slightly
  beaten, and the seasoning. Cook a short time and serve on toasted
  crackers.

  Since it consists of essentially the same ingredients, the food
  value of this dish is obviously much the same as that of fondue
  made in other ways.


Rice Fondue.

  1 cupful of boiled rice.
  2 tablespoonfuls of milk.
  4 eggs.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  1 teaspoonful of some commercial meat
    sauce, or similar flavoring.

  Heat the rice in the milk, add the other ingredients, and cook
  slowly until the cheese is melted. Serve on crackers or toast.

  The food value is not far from that of a pound of beef of average
  composition, and the calculated cost (see p. 23) is 15 cents.


Corn and Cheese Soufflé.

  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 tablespoonful of chopped green pepper.
  ¼ cupful of flour.
  2 cupfuls of milk.
  1 cupful of chopped corn.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  3 eggs.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Melt the butter and cook the pepper thoroughly in it. Make a sauce
  out of the flour, milk, and cheese (see p. 23); add the corn,
  cheese, yolks, and seasoning; cut and fold in the whites beaten
  stiffly; turn into a buttered baking dish and bake in a moderate
  oven 30 minutes.

  Made with skimmed milk and without butter, this dish has a food
  value slightly in excess of a pound of beef and a pound of
  potatoes. Calculated cost (see p. 23), about 20 cents.


Welsh Rabbit.

  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 teaspoonful of cornstarch.
  ½ cupful of milk.
  ½ pound of cheese, cut into small pieces.
  ¼ teaspoonful each of salt and mustard.
  A speck of cayenne pepper.

  Cook the cornstarch in the butter; then add the milk gradually
  and cook two minutes; add the cheese and stir until it is melted.
  Season and serve on crackers or bread toasted on one side, the
  rabbit being poured over the untoasted side. Food value is that of
  about three-fourths of a pound of beef. Calculated cost (see p.
  23), 13 cents.


Tomato Rabbit.

  2 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ¾ cupful of milk.
  ¾ cupful of stewed and strained tomatoes.
  ⅛ teaspoonful of soda.
  1 pound of cheese.
  2 eggs, slightly beaten.
  Salt, mustard, cayenne pepper.

  Cook the butter and the flour together, add the milk, and as soon
  as the mixture thickens add tomatoes and soda. Then add cheese,
  eggs, and seasoning. Serve on toasted whole wheat or Graham bread.


Green Corn, Tomato, and Cheese.

  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  2 cups of grated cheese.
  ¾ cup of canned or grated fresh corn.
  1 ripe pimiento.
  ½ cup of tomato purée.
  2 egg yolks.
  1 teaspoonful of salt.
  ½ teaspoonful of paprika.
  1 clove of garlic.
  4 slices of bread.

  Into the melted butter stir the cheese until it, too, is melted.
  Then add the corn and pimiento, stir for a moment and add the egg
  yolks beaten and mixed with the tomato juice and the salt and
  paprika. Have ready the bread toasted on one side and very lightly
  rubbed on its untoasted side with the garlic cut in two. Pour the
  mixture over the untoasted side of the bread and serve at once. A
  poached egg is sometimes placed on top of each portion, making a
  very nutritious combination.


Macaroni and Cheese No. 1.

  1 cupful of macaroni, broken into small pieces.
  2 quarts of boiling salted water.
  1 cupful of milk.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ¼ to ½ pound of cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  Speck of cayenne pepper.

  Cook the macaroni in the boiling salted water, drain in a strainer,
  and pour cold water over it to prevent the pieces from adhering
  to each other. Make a sauce out of the flour, milk, and cheese.
  (See p. 23.) Put the sauce and macaroni in alternate layers in a
  buttered baking dish, cover with buttered crumbs, and heat in oven
  until crumbs are brown.


Macaroni and Cheese No. 2.

  A good way to prepare macaroni and cheese is to make a rich cheese
  sauce and heat the macaroni in it. (See p. 23.) The mixture is
  usually covered with buttered crumbs and browned in the oven. The
  advantage of this way of preparing the dish, however, is that it is
  unnecessary to have a hot oven, as the sauce and macaroni may be
  reheated on the top of the stove.


Macaroni with Cheese and Tomato Sauce.

  Boiled macaroni may be heated in tomato sauce and sprinkled with
  grated cheese just before serving.


Italian Macaroni and Cheese.

  1 cupful of macaroni broken into small pieces.
  2 quarts of boiling salted water.
  ½ onion.
  2 cloves.
  1½ cupfuls of tomato sauce.
  ½ cupful or more of grated cheese.

  Cook the macaroni in the boiling salted water with the onion and
  cloves. Drain, remove the onion and cloves, reheat in tomato sauce,
  and serve with grated cheese.


Cheese and Macaroni Loaf.

  ½ cupful of macaroni broken into small pieces.
  1 cupful of milk.
  1 cupful of soft bread crumbs.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 tablespoonful of chopped green pepper.
  1 teaspoonful each of chopped onion and parsley.
  3 eggs.
  1 teaspoonful of salt.
  ½ cupful of grated cheese.

  Cook the macaroni in boiling salted water until tender, and rinse
  in cold water. Cook the parsley, onion, and pepper in a little
  water with the butter. Pour off the water or allow it to boil away.
  Beat the egg white and yolk separately. Mix all the ingredients,
  cutting and folding in the stiffly beaten whites at the last. Line
  a quart baking dish with buttered paper; turn the mixture into it;
  set the baking dish in a pan of hot water, and bake in a moderate
  oven from one-half to three-fourths of an hour. Serve with tomato
  sauce.


Baked Rice and Cheese No. 1.

  1 cupful of uncooked rice and
  4 cupfuls of milk;
          or,
  3 cupfuls of cooked rice and
  1 cupful of milk.

  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ½ pound of cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  If uncooked rice is used, it should be cooked in 3 cupfuls of milk.
  Make a sauce with one cupful of milk, add the flour, cheese, and
  salt. (See p. 23.) Into a buttered baking dish put alternate layers
  of the cooked rice and the sauce. Cover with buttered crumbs and
  bake until the crumbs are brown. The proteids in this dish, made
  with rice cooked in milk, are equal to those of nearly 1¾ pounds
  of average beef. If skimmed milk is used, the fuel value is equal
  to nearly 3½ pounds of beef. Whole milk raises the fuel value
  still higher. Estimated cost (see p. 23), 28 cents.


Baked Rice and Cheese No. 2.

  ¼ pound of cheese grated or cut into small pieces.
  1 cupful of rice.
  Milk as needed.

  Cook the rice; put into a buttered baking dish alternate layers of
  rice and cheese; pour over them enough milk to come halfway to the
  top of the rice; cover with buttered crumbs and brown.

  If the rice is cooked in milk either whole or skimmed, and one cup
  of milk is used to pour over it, this dish has as much protein as
  1¼ pounds of beef of average composition, and a much higher fuel
  value.


Baked Crackers and Cheese No. 1.

  9 or 10 butter crackers or Boston crackers.
  ¼ pound of cheese or 1 cupful of grated cheese.
  1½ cupfuls of milk.
  ¼ teaspoonful of salt.
  Flour.

  Split the crackers, if the thick sort are selected, or with a sharp
  knife cut them into pieces of uniform size. Pour the milk over
  them and drain it off at once. With the milk, flour, cheese, and
  salt, make a sauce. (See p. 23.) Into a buttered baking dish put
  alternate layers of the soaked crackers and sauce. Cover with bread
  crumbs and brown in the oven, or simply reheat without covering
  with crumbs.

  The above is a very satisfactory substitute for macaroni and
  cheese, and can be prepared in less time.


Baked Crackers and Cheese No. 2.

  9 or 10 butter crackers or soda crackers.
  2 cupfuls of hot milk, whole or skimmed.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  ¼ teaspoonful of salt.

  This is more quickly prepared than the preceding recipe, but as the
  milk is likely to curdle, it has not so good a consistency.

  Soak the crackers in the milk; place them in a buttered baking
  dish in alternate layers with the cheese; pour the remaining milk
  over them and bake. This dish may be covered with buttered crumbs.
  Variety may be secured, in either this recipe or the preceding one,
  by putting a very small amount of mixed mustard on each cracker.


Cheese Rolls.

  A large variety of rolls may be made by combining legumes, either
  beans of various kinds, cowpeas, lentils, or peas, with cheese of
  various kinds, and adding bread crumbs to make the mixture thick
  enough to form into a roll. Beans are usually mashed, but peas or
  small Lima beans may be combined whole with bread crumbs and grated
  cheese, and enough of the liquor in which the vegetables have been
  cooked may be added to get the right consistency. Or, instead of
  beans or peas, chopped spinach, beet tops, or head lettuce may
  be used. Homemade cottage cheese, and the soft cream cheese of
  commerce, standard cheese, or English dairy may be used.


Boston Roast.

  1 pound can of kidney beans or equivalent
    quantity of cooked beans.
  ½ pound of grated cheese.
  Bread crumbs.
  Salt.

  Mash the beans or put them through a meat grinder. Add the cheese
  and sufficient bread crumbs to make the mixture stiff enough to be
  formed into a roll. Bake in a moderate oven, basting occasionally
  with butter and water. Serve with tomato sauce. This dish may be
  flavored with onions, chopped and cooked in butter and water.


Pimiento and Cheese Roast.

  2 cupfuls of cooked Lima beans.
  ¼ pound of cream cheese, commercial or homemade.
  3 canned pimientos chopped.
  Bread crumbs.

  Put the first three ingredients through a meat chopper. Mix
  thoroughly and add bread crumbs until it is stiff enough to form
  into a roll. Brown in the oven, basting occasionally with butter
  and water.


Nut and Cheese Roast.

  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  1 cupful of chopped English walnuts.
  1 cupful of bread crumbs.
  2 tablespoonfuls of chopped onion.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  Juice of half a lemon.
  Salt and pepper.

  Cook the onion in the butter and a little water until it is tender.
  Mix the other ingredients and moisten with water, using the water
  in which the onion has been cooked. Pour into a shallow baking dish
  and brown in the oven.


Cheese and Spinach Roll.

  2 quarts of spinach.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  Salt.
  Bread crumbs.

  Cook the spinach in water for 10 minutes. Drain off the water, add
  the butter, cook until tender, and chop. Add the grated cheese and
  then bread crumbs enough to make a mixture sufficiently stiff to
  form into a roll, or leave more moist and cook in a baking dish.


Vegetable and Cheese Rolls.

  For the spinach of the above recipe there may be substituted beet
  tops, Swiss chard, or the outer leaves of lettuce.


Cheese Used in the Stuffing of Meat.

  The mixtures in the preceding two recipes may be used for stuffing
  veal or beef. Eggs may be added if desired, and chopped onions
  or parsley may be cooked with the greens. In Italy roasts thus
  prepared are sprinkled with a little finely chopped garlic, and
  covered with celery tops and thin slices of bacon or fat pork
  before roasting.


Creamed Cheese and Eggs.

  3 hard-boiled eggs.
  1 tablespoonful of flour.
  1 cupful of milk.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  Speck of cayenne.
  ¼ cupful or 1 ounce grated cheese.
  4 slices of toast.

  Make a thin white sauce with the flour and milk and seasonings. Add
  the cheese and stir until melted. Chop the whites and add them to
  the sauce. Pour the sauce over the toast, force the yolks through a
  potato ricer or strainer, sprinkle over the toast.


Baked Eggs with Cheese.

  4 eggs.
  1 cupful, or 4 ounces, of grated cheese.
  1 cupful of fine, soft, stale bread crumbs.
  ¼ teaspoonful salt.
  A few grains of Cayenne pepper.

  Break the eggs into a buttered baking dish or into ramekins and
  cook them in a hot oven until they begin to turn white around the
  edge. Cover with the mixture of crumbs, cheese, and seasonings.
  Brown in a very hot oven. In preparing this dish it is essential
  that the oven be very hot or the egg will be too much cooked by the
  time the cheese is brown. To avoid this, some cooks cover the eggs
  with white sauce before adding crumbs.

  The food value of the dish is very close to that of a pound of beef
  of average composition. The estimated cost (see p. 23) is about 14
  cents.

  For those who are particularly fond of cheese the amount of cheese
  in this recipe may be very much increased, thus making a much more
  nourishing dish. Or the amount may be reduced so as to give hardly
  more than a suggestion of the flavor of cheese.


Scrambled Eggs with Cheese.

  ½ pound of cheese grated or cut into small pieces.
  8 eggs
  1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley.
  A pinch of nutmeg.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.

  Beat the eggs slightly, mix them with the other ingredients, and
  cook over a very slow fire, stirring constantly, so that the cheese
  may be melted by the time the eggs are cooked. In food value the
  dish is equal to nearly 2 pounds of average beef. The calculated
  cost (see p. 23) is about 30 cents.


Swiss Eggs.

  4 eggs.
  ½ cupful of cream.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  Salt and pepper.
  ¼ cupful of grated cheese.

  Heat the butter and cream together, break in the eggs whole,
  sprinkle with salt and pepper. When nearly done, add the cheese.
  Serve on buttered toast. Strain the cream over the toast.


Cheese Omelet No. 1.

  Cheese may be introduced into omelets in several ways. An ordinary
  omelet may be served with thin cheese sauce made in the following
  proportions:

  1½ tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ¼ cupful of grated cheese.
  1 cupful of milk.

  This sauce may also be added to omelets in which boiled rice,
  minced meat, or some other nutritious material has been included.


Cheese Omelet No. 2.

  Grated cheese may be sprinkled over an ordinary omelet before it is
  served.


Cheese Omelet No. 3.

  Yolks of 2 eggs.
  2 tablespoonfuls of hot water.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  Salt and pepper.
  Whites of 4 eggs.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.

  Beat the yolks until lemon colored and add the hot water and the
  seasoning. Beat the whites until they are stiff, and add the
  cheese. Cut and fold the two mixtures together. Heat the butter in
  omelet pan and cook the mixture very slowly until it is brown on
  the underside. If possible, cook the top of the omelet in the oven
  or by means of a hot plate held over it.


Breakfast Cereals with Cheese.

  That cheese combined with cereal foods makes a rational dish as
  regards the proportion of nutrients it supplies has been pointed
  out on another page (p. 18). Cheese and some of the crisp “ready to
  serve” cereal breakfast foods is a combination which is common, the
  cheese being melted with the cereal food, or simply served with it.

  There are many who relish a piece of cheese with the cooked cereal
  so commonly eaten for breakfast and find such a combination
  satisfying to appetite and taste. Oatmeal or some other home-cooked
  breakfast cereal prepared with cheese is palatable, and such
  dishes have an advantage in that they may be served without cream
  and sugar. Since such a dish contains considerably more protein
  than the breakfast cereals as ordinarily served, it has a further
  advantage in that it may well serve as the principal item of a
  breakfast menu, instead of a preliminary to other courses. Such
  a combination as cereals cooked with cheese, toast, fruit, and
  tea, coffee, or chocolate, makes a palatable as well as nutritious
  breakfast and one which does not require much work to prepare and
  to clear away. A recipe for preparing oatmeal with cheese follows.
  Wheat breakfast foods, either parched or unparched, corn meal, and
  hominy may be prepared in the same way.


Oatmeal with Cheese.

  2 cupfuls of oatmeal.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  1 tablespoonful of butter.
  1 level teaspoonful of salt.

  Cook the oatmeal as usual. Shortly before serving, stir in the
  butter and add the cheese, and stir until the cheese is melted and
  thoroughly blended with the cereal.

  The cheese should be mild in flavor and soft in texture. The
  proportion of cheese used may be increased if a more pronounced
  cheese flavor is desired.


Cheese with Mush.

  Cheese may be added to corn-meal mush or to mush made from any of
  the corn or wheat preparations now on the market. The addition of
  cheese to corn-meal mush is particularly desirable when the mush is
  to be fried.


Fried Bread with Cheese No. 1.

  6 slices of bread.
  1 cupful of milk.
  2 ounces of cheese, or ½ cupful of grated cheese.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  ½ teaspoonful of potassium bicarbonate.
  Butter or other fat for frying.

  Scald the milk with the potassium bicarbonate; add the grated
  cheese, and stir until it dissolves. Dip the bread in this mixture
  and fry it in the butter. The potassium bicarbonate helps to keep
  the cheese in solution. It is desirable, however, to keep the milk
  hot while the bread is being dipped.


Fried Bread with Cheese No. 2.

  Cut stale bread into thin pieces. Put two pieces together with
  grated cheese between them; dip into a mixture of egg and milk and
  fry in butter or other fat.


Roman Gnocchi.

  ¼ cupful of butter.
  ¼ cupful of flour.
  ¼ cupful of cornstarch.
  2 cupfuls of milk.
  2 egg yolks.
  ¾ cupful of grated cheese.
  Salt.

  Melt the butter; cook the cornstarch thoroughly, and then the flour
  in the butter; add the milk gradually; cook three minutes, stirring
  constantly; add the yolks and one-half cupful of the cheese. Pour
  into a buttered shallow pan and cool. Cut into squares; place them
  on a platter a little distance apart; sprinkle with remaining
  cheese, and brown in the oven.

  The proteid value is that of three-fourths of a pound of average
  beef, the fuel value that of 1¾ pounds. Calculated cost (see p.
  23), 17 cents.


Cheese Soufflé.

  2 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  3 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  ½ cupful of milk (scalded).
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  A speck of cayenne.
  ¼ cupful of grated cheese.
  3 eggs.

  Melt the butter; add the flour and, when well mixed, add gradually
  the scalded milk. Then add salt, cayenne, and cheese. Remove from
  the fire and add the yolks of the eggs, beaten until lemon colored.
  Cool the mixture and fold into it the whites of the eggs, beaten
  until stiff. Pour into a buttered baking dish and cook 20 minutes
  in a slow oven. Serve at once.

  The proteid of this recipe is equal to that of half a pound of
  beef; the fuel value is equal to that of three-fourths of a pound.


Cheese Soufflé with Pastry.

  2 eggs.
  ⅔ cupful of thin cream.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  ½ cupful of Swiss cheese cut into small pieces.
  Salt, cayenne pepper, and nutmeg.

  Add the eggs to the cream and beat slightly, then add the cheese
  and seasoning. Bake 15 minutes in a hot oven, in patty tins lined
  with puff paste.


Cheese Croquettes.

  3 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  ¼ cupful of flour.
  ⅔ cupful of milk.
  Yolks of 2 eggs.
  1 cupful of cheese cut in very small pieces.
  ½ cupful grated cheese.
  Salt and pepper.

  Make with a white sauce, using the butter, flour, and the milk. Add
  the unbeaten yolks and stir until well mixed, then add the grated
  cheese. As soon as the cheese melts, remove from the fire, fold in
  the pieces of cheese, and add the seasoning. Spread in a shallow
  pan and cool. Cut into squares or strips, cover with an egg and
  crumb mixture, and fry in deep fat.


Fried Cheese Balls.

  1½ cupfuls of grated cheese.
  1 tablespoonful of flour.
  The whites of 3 eggs.
  Salt, pepper, cracker dust.

  Beat the whites of the eggs; add the other ingredients; make into
  balls and roll in cracker dust. If the amount of flour is doubled,
  the mixture may be dropped from a spoon and fried without being
  rolled in crumbs.




CHEESE SOUPS AND VEGETABLES COOKED WITH CHEESE.


In these dishes the cheese is used not only to add nutritive value,
but also to give its characteristic flavor either to materials
otherwise rather mild in taste (as in potatoes with cheese) or to
combine its flavor with that of some more highly flavored vegetables
(as in cheese and vegetable soup). The ingenious housekeeper whose
family is fond of cheese can doubtless think of many desirable ways
of making such combinations besides those given in the following
recipes:


Milk and Cheese Soup.

  3 cupfuls of milk, or part milk and part stock.
  1½ tablespoonfuls of flour.
  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  Salt and paprika.

  Thicken the milk with the flour, cooking thoroughly. This is best
  done in a double boiler, with frequent stirrings. When ready to
  serve, add the cheese and the seasoning.

  The proteids in this soup are equal in amount to those in
  five-sixths of a pound of beef of average composition; its fuel
  value is higher than that of a pound of beef.


Cheese and Vegetable Soup.

  2 cupfuls of stock.
  2 tablespoonfuls of finely chopped carrots.
  1 tablespoonful of chopped onion.
  A very little mace.
  2 tablespoonfuls of butter.
  2 tablespoonfuls of flour.
  1½ teaspoonfuls of salt.
  1 cupful of scalded milk.
  ¼ cupful of grated cheese.

  Cook the vegetables a short time in one-half of the butter, add
  the stock and the mace, boiling 15 or 20 minutes. Strain and add
  the milk. Thicken with flour cooked in the remaining butter. Just
  before serving, stir in the cheese and cook until it is melted.


Scalloped Potatoes with Cheese No. 1.

  Put into a buttered baking dish alternate layers of cheese sauce
  No. 1 (see p. 22) and cold boiled potatoes, sliced or cut into
  dice. Cover with buttered crumbs and bake.


Scalloped Potatoes with Cheese No. 2.

  Put into a buttered baking dish alternate layers of white sauce and
  cold boiled potatoes, either sliced or cut into dice. Put over the
  top a layer of grated cheese and then a layer of buttered bread
  crumbs. Brown in the oven.


Scalloped Cabbage or Cauliflower with Cheese.

  Cauliflower or cabbage may be scalloped according to either of
  the recipes given for scalloped potatoes and cheese. Sometimes a
  cauliflower is boiled whole, spread with grated cheese, then with
  buttered bread crumbs. It is browned in the oven and served with
  white sauce poured around it.


Cheese with Potato Puffs.

  1 cupful of mashed potatoes.
  ¼ cupful of milk.
  1 egg.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  ½ cupful of grated cheese.

  Beat the potatoes and milk together until thoroughly mixed. Add the
  egg and the salt and beat thoroughly. Finally add the cheese. Bake
  in muffin tins in a slow oven 10 or 15 minutes.

  A similar dish may be made by scooping out the inside of a baked
  potato and mixing it with cheese as above. Fill the potato-skin
  shell with the mixture, return to the oven, and bake until light
  brown.


Potatoes with Cheese Sauce.

  Cut boiled potatoes into cubes and serve with cheese sauce No. 1.
  (See p. 22.) This is one of the cheese and vegetable dishes most
  frequently found on restaurant menus.




CHEESE SALADS, SANDWICHES, AND SIMILAR CHEESE DISHES.


Cheese of one sort or another is a very common accompaniment of
salads, and the combination is rational as well as palatable,
for the constituents of the succulent foods—chiefly water and
cellulose—supplement the protein and fat of the cheese. Cheese is
often used also as a part of the salad.

A number of recipes are given below for cheese salads and other
cheese dishes which may be served with dinner or other regular meals,
or served as part of a special lunch or special supper. Many of the
cheese dishes discussed in other sections are also commonly used for
such occasions when something savory is desired which can be easily
and quickly prepared.


Cheese with Salads.

  Cheese or cheese dishes are an acceptable addition to salads.
  Neufchâtel or other cream cheese, either plain or mixed with
  pimientos and olives, may be passed with lettuce or may be cut into
  slices and served on lettuce.

  Cheese balls are often served with salad. They are made of some
  soft cream cheese, and are frequently combined with chopped chives,
  olives, sweet peppers, chopped nuts, etc., for the sake of adding
  flavor. Cooked egg yolk, spinach extract, etc., are sometimes mixed
  in for the sake of color. If the balls are rolled in chopped chives
  or parsley, both flavor and color are supplied.


Plain Cheese Salad.

  Cut Edam or ordinary American cheese into thin pieces, scatter them
  over lettuce leaves, and serve with French dressing.


Olive and Pimiento Sandwich or Salad Cheese.

  Mash any of the soft cream cheeses and add chopped olives and
  pimientos in equal parts. This mixture requires much salt to make
  it palatable to most palates, the amount depending chiefly on the
  quantity of pimiento used. The mixture may be spread between thin
  slices of bread or it may be made into a roll or molded, cut into
  slices, and served on lettuce leaves with French dressing.


Cheese and Tomato Salad.

  Stuff cold tomatoes with cream cheese and serve on lettuce leaves
  with French dressing.


Cheese and Pimiento Salad.

  Stuff canned pimientos with cream cheese, cut into slices, and
  serve one or two slices to each person on lettuce leaves with
  French dressing.


Cheese Jelly Salad.

  ½ cupful of grated cheese.
  1 tablespoonful of gelatin.
  1 cupful of whipped cream.
  Salt and pepper to taste.

  Mix the cheese with the whipped cream, season to taste with salt
  and pepper, and add to the gelatin dissolved in a scant cupful of
  water. This may be molded in a large mold or in small molds.

  When the jelly begins to harden, cover with grated cheese. The
  jelly should be served on a lettuce leaf, preferably with a cream
  dressing or a French dressing, to which a little grated cheese has
  been added.


Cheese Salad and Preserves.

  Epicures have devised a dish which consists of lettuce with
  French dressing served with cream cheese and thick preparations
  of currants or other fruits preserved in honey or sugar, which,
  owing to the fact that the seeds have been extracted by a laborious
  process, are fairly expensive. The soft cheese often found in
  market is also relatively expensive. There is a suggestion in this
  dish, however, for others which are much less costly. Buttermilk
  cream (see p. 21), or ordinary cottage cheese served with lettuce
  or other green salad and a small amount of rich homemade preserves,
  is a combination with much the same character, and also very
  appetizing.


Deviled Eggs with Cheese.

  In making deviled eggs, either to be eaten alone or upon lettuce
  leaves in the form of salad, a little grated cheese may be mixed
  with the yolks in addition to the usual salad dressing and
  flavorings with which the yolks are mixed.


Cheese and Celery.

  Cut stalks of celery having deep grooves in them into pieces
  about 2 inches long. Fill the grooves with cream cheese salted or
  flavored with chopped pimientos, and serve with bread and butter as
  a salad course or serve as a relish at the beginning of a meal.

Although not cheese dishes, strictly speaking, the following salad
dressings made with buttermilk cream (see p. 21) may be included in
this section.


Buttermilk Cream Salad Dressing.

  ½ cupful of buttermilk cream (see p. 21).
  1 tablespoonful of vinegar.
  ¼ teaspoonful of salt.
  Cayenne pepper.

  This dressing is particularly suitable for serving with cucumbers.


Buttermilk Cream Horseradish Salad Dressing.

  To buttermilk cream add a little grated horseradish and vinegar and
  salt. Serve on whole or sliced tomatoes.


Cheese Sandwiches.

  Mash or grate American cheese, add salt, a few drops of vinegar and
  paprika, and a speck of mustard. Mix thoroughly and spread between
  thin slices of bread.


Cheese and Anchovy Sandwiches.

  To the mixture mentioned in the preceding recipe, add a little
  anchovy essence. Sardines mashed or rubbed into a paste or any
  other fish paste may be used in a similar way.


Pimiento, Olive, and Cheese Sandwiches.

  These sandwiches are referred to on page 34.


Cuban Sandwiches.

  This sandwich may be described as a kind of club sandwich with
  cheese. It is usually made large so that it is necessary to eat it
  with a knife and fork. It may be made in such proportions as to
  supply a large amount of nourishment.

  Cut the crusts from slices of bread. Between two slices lay first
  lettuce with a little salad dressing or salt on it, then a slice
  of soft mild cheese and finally thin slices of dill pickles or a
  little chopped pickle.


Toasted Cheese Sandwiches.

  Plain bread and butter sandwiches with fairly thick slices of
  cheese put between the slices are frequently toasted, and on
  picnics, or at chafing-dish suppers, are often browned in a pan in
  which bacon has just been fried.




CHEESE PASTRY, CHEESE SWEETS, AND SIMILAR DISHES.


In the foregoing pages a large number of recipes have been included
in which cheese is combined with materials without cooking, as
in salads, or used in cooked dishes of creamy or custard-like
consistency, as in soufflés and Welsh rabbit or in combination with
vegetables or cereals, such as rice.

There are a number of cheese dishes of quite different character in
which the cheese is combined with dough, batter, or pastry in various
ways, and a number of dishes in which cheese or cheese curd is used
in combinations suitable for dessert. Such sweet dishes were once
much more common than they are to-day, as reference to old cookery
books will show, but some of them are well worth retaining.

In cheese sweets, flavor and richness are both contributed by the
cheese.

When cheese is used in pastry or dough it may serve simply as a
flavor, as in cheese sticks or cheese straws, or it may wholly or in
part replace with its fat the usual shortening, as butter or other
fat, and with its protein (casein) the protein (albumin) of eggs. As
an illustration of such a use of cheese, cheese gingerbread may be
cited.

Using cheese in this way is often an economy when eggs are scarce.
Better results will be obtained if soft cheese is used which can
be worked into the dough in much the same way as butter or other
shortening. To those who like cheese the flavor which it imparts
would be an advantage. However, if a very mild cheese is used in
combination with molasses or spice the dish differs a little in
flavor from one prepared in the usual way.


CHEESE PASTRIES AND SIMILAR DISHES.


Cheese Biscuit No. 1.

  2 cupfuls of flour.
  4 teaspoonfuls of baking powder.
  2 tablespoonfuls of lard or butter.
  ⅞ of a cup of milk.
  ¼ teaspoonful of salt.
  Grated cheese sufficient to give desired flavor.

  Mix all the ingredients excepting the cheese as for baking powder
  biscuits. Roll thin, divide into two parts, sprinkle one half with
  grated cheese, lay the other half of the dough over the cheese, cut
  out with a small cutter, and bake.


Cheese Biscuit No. 2.

  ¼ pound of soft cheese.
  2 cupfuls of flour.
  1 cupful of water.
  4 teaspoonfuls of baking powder.
  1½ teaspoonfuls of salt.

  Mix and sift the dry ingredients, then work in the cheese with
  a fork or with the fingers, and add the water gradually. The
  approximate amount of water has been given; it is impossible to
  give the exact amount, as flour differs in its capacity for taking
  up moisture. Toss the dough on a floured board and roll out and
  cut with a biscuit cutter. Place in a buttered pan and bake in a
  quick oven from 12 to 15 minutes. The biscuit may be sprinkled with
  cheese before being put into the oven.

  If the cheese is sufficiently soft it can be measured just as
  butter is. This recipe, then, would call for ½ cupful.


Cheese Drops.

  2½ tablespoonfuls of milk.
  1 teaspoonful of butter.
  1¼ cupfuls of flour.
  ⅛ teaspoonful of salt.
  1 egg.
  2 tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese
    or dry American cheese.

  Heat the butter and milk to boiling point, add the flour and the
  salt and stir thoroughly. Remove from the fire, add the egg and
  cheese and stir until well mixed. When cold, drop in small pieces
  in deep fat and brown. This makes a good addition to any clear soup
  or to consommé.


Cheese Wafers.

  Spread grated cheese on thin crackers, heat in the oven until the
  cheese is melted. Serve with soup or salad.


Cheese Relish.

  Spread bread which has been toasted or fried in deep fat with
  grated cheese, or with grated cheese mixed with a little mustard,
  then heat in the oven until the cheese is melted. This may be
  served with salad, or as a relish to give flavor to some dish such
  as boiled rice or hominy, which has no very marked flavor.


Cheese Straws.

  Roll out plain or puff paste until one-fourth of an inch thick.
  Spread one-half of it with grated cheese. Fold over the other half
  and roll out again. Repeat the process three or four times. Cut
  into strips and bake. Serve with soup or salad.


Salad Biscuit.

  ½ pound of cheese.
  2 cupfuls of flour.
  4 teaspoonfuls of baking powder.
  1½ teaspoonfuls of salt.
  1 cupful of water.

  Mix as for cheese biscuits No. 1 or No. 2, depending on whether the
  cheese is hard or soft. (See p. 36.)


Cheese Gingerbread No. 1.

  1 cupful of molasses.
  4 ounces of cheese.
  1 teaspoonful of soda.
  ½ cupful of water.
  2 cupfuls of flour.
  2 teaspoonfuls of ginger.
  ½ teaspoonful salt.

  Heat the molasses and the cheese in a double boiler until the
  cheese is melted. Add the soda and stir vigorously. Mix and sift
  dry ingredients and add them to the molasses and cheese alternately
  with the water. Bake 15 minutes in small buttered tins.


Cheese Gingerbread No. 2.

  ½ cupful of molasses.
  ½ cupful of sugar.
  4 ounces of cheese.
  2 cupfuls of flour.
  1 teaspoonful of soda.
  2 teaspoonfuls of ginger.
  ½ teaspoonful of salt.
  ¾ cupful of water.

  Rub the cheese and the sugar together. Add the molasses. Mix
  and sift the dry ingredients and add them to the cheese mixture
  alternately with the water.


Cheese Custard.

  1 cupful of grated cheese.
  ½ cupful of cream or rich milk.
  Yolks of 2 eggs.
  A speck of salt and of paprika.

  Mix the cream and the cheese and heat until the cheese is melted.
  Remove from the fire and add the yolks of the eggs. Bake in paper
  cases or buttered ramekins. Serve with jelly or preserves.


Cheese Cakes.

  1 quart of milk.
  Rennet.
  1 ounce of sugar.
  Yolks of 2 eggs.
  A speck of nutmeg.
  1½ ounces of butter.
  1 ounce of dried currants or small raisins.

  Warm the milk and add the rennet, using the amount prescribed on
  the package. Let the milk stand until the curd forms, then break up
  the curd and strain off the whey. Add the other ingredients to the
  curd; line patty tins with pastry, fill them with the mixture, and
  bake.


Brown Betty with Cheese.

  Arrange in a deep earthenware baking dish, alternate layers of
  bread crumbs and thinly sliced apples. Season with cinnamon, also a
  little clove if desired and brown sugar. Scatter some finely shaved
  mild full-cream cheese over each layer of apple. When the dish is
  full, scatter bread crumbs over the top and bake 30 to 45 minutes,
  placing the dish in a pan of water so that the pudding will not
  burn.

  If preferred, this may be sweetened with molasses mixed with an
  equal amount of hot water and poured over the top, a half cupful of
  molasses being sufficient for a quart pudding dish full.

  Cheese may be used in place of butter in a similar way in other
  apple puddings. Apple pie made with a layer of finely shaved cheese
  over the seasoned apple and baked in the usual way is liked by many
  who are fond of cheese served with apple pie.




CONCLUSION.


In the foregoing pages information has been summarized regarding the
food value of cheese, an important agricultural product, and ways of
preparing it for the table. It has been pointed out that, judged by
the kind of nutrients it supplies—chiefly nitrogenous material and
fat—and the proportion in which they are present, it resembles such
foodstuffs as meat, fish, and eggs, which means that like them its
rational use in the diet is in combination with other staple foods,
to form well-balanced meals.

Experiments have shown that when eaten either raw or carefully
cooked, cheese is as thoroughly digested as other staple foods and is
not likely to produce physiological disturbance.

An ounce of cheese roughly is equivalent to 1 egg, to a glass of
milk, or to 2 ounces of meat.

Although uncooked cheese resembles meat in composition, cheese dishes
prepared after ordinary recipes, with milk and shortening, are likely
to contain more fat than meat dishes prepared in the usual ways.
When, therefore, such cheese dishes are served with other staple
foods the combination is likely to contain more fat than the usual
meal. If little fat is ordinarily used, this may be an advantage. If
a great deal of fat is ordinarily used, it may be desirable to lessen
the amount in the cheese dishes. This can readily be done by omitting
the shortening and using skim milk or water in the preparation of
such dishes, a change which also lessens their cost.

The fact that cheese, like meat, contains neither starch nor
cellulose suggests that, like meat, it should be combined with bread,
potatoes, and other starchy foods, with vegetables and with sweets.
The concentrated character of cheese and many cheese dishes suggests
the use of succulent fruits and vegetables with them. The high
percentage of fat in cheese suggests the use of correspondingly small
amounts of fat in the accompanying dishes, while the soft texture of
cheese dishes as compared with meat makes it reasonable to serve the
harder and crustier breads with them.

When cheese is not used as the chief nitrogenous food of a meal it
may be introduced into bills of fare in many incidental ways, and
thus add materially to that portion of the diet needed for building
and repairing body tissue.

Though cheese is so generally used in some way in most families,
yet the making of menus with cheese as a central dish is less well
understood than more usual food combinations, since there is less
experience to serve as a guide. More thought is therefore usually
required to arrange such cheese meals in order that they may be
palatable and at the same time reasonable in nutritive value.

In order that the diet may remain well balanced, cheese, if used in
quantity, should replace foods of similar composition rather than
supplement them. The builder who has a choice of materials must have
a knowledge of their relative properties if he wishes to use stone
instead of brick, or wood in place of iron. It is the same with the
housekeeper who wishes to use her available food supply intelligently
and whose choice of foods is influenced by their relative cost at a
given time or season. The woman who has a knowledge of the relative
food value of different articles of diet, and their real food
qualities as distinguished from their market value, who understands
good methods of cooking and serving foods, and who plans her meals
and other housework so that unnecessary labor and expense may be
avoided, is taking account of the things which make for economical
living as well as for good living.

Some persons seem to believe that cheese or fish or other food is
the ideal food for some particular circumstance and that there is
a special food or diet suited to each kind of work and to every
circumstance of our daily life, and that it would be a great
advantage if we could regulate our daily fare with the accuracy a
chemist uses in making an experiment. Work, recreation, the amount
of clothing we wear, and other details of our daily life are not
so regulated, and it is the belief of those who have studied the
subject that the best interests of persons living under normal
conditions are served if the ideal be rather the regulation of the
diet along general lines in accordance with good sense, the teachings
of experience, economy, and the available knowledge gained from
a scientific study of the subject, due care being taken that the
different staple foodstuffs are so combined that all the needs of
the body are provided, excessive waste is prevented, and that both
undernourishment and excess or overeating are avoided.

Dishes which are liked and the methods followed in preparing them
will vary in different countries and at different times, yet this
does not of necessity mean that the nutritive value of the diet
varies correspondingly. In the same way it is possible for us to
vary the selection of our foods and the character of our diet at
will, according to the demands of our taste and our purse, without
correspondingly changing its value for supplying the needs of the
body. This means that the housekeeper, in suitable ways, can use
cheese, meat, fish, eggs, and other foods of similar composition as
substitutes for one another, being governed by their relative market
value at different times and seasons, by the tastes of her family,
and similar considerations. If she uses the different foodstuffs with
reference to their nutritive value and is skillful in preparing foods
in appetizing ways and in serving them in attractive combinations,
the daily fare may be both adequate and pleasing, whether she selects
cheese or meat or fish or eggs or other foods to supply nitrogenous
material and fat. Here, as in all that pertains to housekeeping, true
economy is dependent upon a knowledge of materials and skill in using
them.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 8 Removed repeated word the from: If cream is removed the the
         cheese
  pg 12 Changed brought about chiefly by the action of enzyms to:
          enzymes
  pg 15 Changed 90 per cent of the nitrogeous to: nitrogenous
  pg 20 Changed the curd assumes a custardlike to: custard-like
  pg 24 Added period after No in: Cheese Fondue No 1.
  pg 24 Added period after: 1 tablespoonful of butter
  pg 25 Changed Corn and Cheese Souffle. to: Soufflé.
  pg 31 Added period after: Salt, cayenne pepper, and nutmeg



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHEESE AND ITS ECONOMICAL USES IN THE DIET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


